### History 504.02  
The Ancient City



This course investigates the history of cities in the ancient world: the Near
East, Greece, and the Roman Empire. These cities were one of the most splendid
creations of ancient civilization, and their architecture and public amenities
frequently rank with those of the cities of the modern world. On the other
hand, many of those cities were crowded and dirty, and life was sometimes
difficult and degrading. This course will investigate life in ancient cities,
focusing on two related primary questions: 1) the significance and role of
cities in ancient civilization, and 2) the development of the physical form of
cities, including the history of urban planning. The course will assume a
basic familiarity with the outlines of ancient history and it will require
proper, logical historical analysis (using evidence to construct good, logical
arguments). The course will also make analogies with modern urban conditions
wherever appropriate and it will consistently examine the "quality of life" in
the cities of antiquity, comparing urban and rural life in a variety of
historical circumstances. A special feature of this course is the opportunity
to make use of material from the University's excavation at Isthmia in Greece
as first-hand information about cities and urban life in the ancient world.



**Instructor:** Professor Timothy E. Gregory, 365 Dulles Hall, telephone
292-1949 (office), 292-2674 (department, to leave a message), and 291-4015
(home). Office hours: Monday and Wednesday 12:30-1:30, Tuesday 2:30-3:30, and
by appointment at other times.



**Required Reading** :

John E, Stambaugh, _The Ancient Roman City_

R.E. Wycherley, _How the Greeks Built Cities_

_Readings in Ancient Urban History_ (collected readings)

These books are available only at SBX. Other required readings may be
distributed from time to time. Note that the course assumes a _basic_
knowledge of ancient history (what you would be expected to learn in History
111); if you do not already have that knowledge, you should read a basic
textbook or at least read an elementary article in an encyclopedia on ancient
history. The course will not be able to provide this chronological background
for you.



**CLASS SCHEDULE AND READING ASSIGNMENTS**

January 3 THE ORIGINS OF THE CITY

Readings I-II

January 10 THE NEAR EASTERN CITY

Readings III

January 17 AEGEAN PALACES AND EARLY CITIES

Readings IV

January 24 RISE OF THE POLIS

Isthmia Multi-Medium Presentation (computer-based presentation,

time and place of availability to be announced)

Readings V

Wycherley, pp. 1-138

January 31 CLASSICAL ATHENS

Wycherley, pp. 139-209

February 7 HELLENISTIC CITIES

February 14 EARLY ROME

Stambaugh, _The Ancient Roman City_ , pp. 7-122

February 21 ITALIAN AND EASTERN ROMAN CITIES

Readings VII

Stambaugh, pp. 123-212; 255-274

February 28 WESTERN ROMAN CITIES AND URBAN CULTURE

Readings VI

Stambaugh, pp. 213-254; 275-286

March 7 CITIES AT THE END OF ANTIQUITY

Readings VIII-IX

N.B. Readings should normally be completed by the first day of each week.



**EXAMINATIONS:**

There will be two mid-term examinations (January 24 and February 14) and a
final examination (Tuesday, March 15, 11:30 AM to 1:18 PM). These examinations
will include both short-answer and essay questions.



**CLASS PROJECT:**

In addition, all students will be expected to present a class project of their
own choosing. This may be either

A. a typical term paper investigating some aspect of ancient urban history
(10-15 pages)

or

B. a presentation based on material fom the The Ohio State University
excavations at Isthmia in Greece. This presentation will involve at least the
following elements: 1) preparing a computerized plan of one area of the site
and 2) providing a graphic or written discussion of what that area looked like
and was used for during one specific period of history.

Your grade for this project will depend on how much work you put into the
project and how well it reflects the themes covered in the course. Students
may work in groups, although a project done by several people should be
"better" or more complex than one done by a single person, and all members of
a group will receive the same grade. You should begin working on the Class
Project as early as possible. All projects must be approved by the instructor
and you must submit a short (ungraded) description of what you plan to do no
later than February 11 (or earlier if you like). Final projects are due on
March 11.



**GRADING:**

Grades will be assigned according to the following schedule:

Mid-term Examinations 30% (15% each)

Class Project 30%

Final Examination 30%

Participation  & Improvement 10%

Please note that all work in this class must be your own (or cooperation
specifically acknowledged, as in the Class Project). Plagiarism involves any
kind of "cheating" on examinations or on the Class Project. Simply put, all
work submitted for this course must be your own. Plagiarism is serious
academic dishonesty and it can have very unpleasant repercussions, including
dismissal from the University.

