![](smlogo2.gif)

**

Luzerne County Community College

Standard Course Syllabus

**







**

Course Number**: HIS231

**

Course Title**: Luzerne County History

**

Department**: Social Science/History

**

Credits**: 3 **Lecture Hours:** 3

**Laboratory Hours:** 0

**

Clinical Hours**: 0

**

Prerequisites:** None

**

Co-requisites**: None

**

Course Description**: This course deals with the history of Luzerne County in
the lower northeastern section of Pennsylvania. The course begins with a
consideration of important definitions, themes, and methods of "Local History"
as a field of study. It continues with an overview of various geographic and
geologic characteristics of the County and their influence on the County's
historic development. Most of the course is an examination and analysis of
major events, persons, ideas, institutions, and trends that produced the
foundations of the modern Luzerne County community. Chronologically the course
covers the period from the 17th century to the late 20th century. Some major
topic considered are: the early settlement patterns and the formation of the
new county in 1786 and the evolution of the current county boundaries in the
19th century; the Revolutionary War era and the County's role in the war;
early political, economic, and social characteristics; the 19th century
transformation and growth; the rise and decline of the anthracite coal
industry; ethnic diversity; cultural development; the political kaleidoscope
of the 19th and 20th centuries; economic depression; the trials and
tribulations of economic diversification; and the recent metamorphosis of the
County.

**

Course Goals**:

This course provides students the opportunity to:

1\. To improve understanding of the major events which have influenced the
character of Luzerne County and the world around it.

2\. To understand the influence of the past on contemporary events and
problems.

3\. To develop intelligent consumers and evaluators of information about
events taking place regionally and their relationship to national and global
affairs.

4\. To develop a perspective which recognizes the political, economic, and
cultural interdependence of local regions, nation-states, and the global
community. **

Student Learning Objectives or Outcomes**:

Upon successful completion of this course, students will be able to:

Goal 1:

1.a. Distinguish the main stages of Luzerne County history (from the 17th
through the 20th centuries.) that produced important forms of political,
social, economic, and cultural organization that are our common heritage.

1.b. Identify major historical concepts, ideas, events and people (from the
17th through the 20th centuries.) that contributed to the development of
Luzerne County's attitudes and institutions and their relationship to broader
historical developments.

1.c. Develop concepts that give meaning and order to the raw material of the
human recorded past.

1.d. Comprehend how historians explore the past and the types of understanding
that can be gained through the study of history.

1.e. Initiate interpretative and synthetic thinking about the past based on a
variety of both quantitative and qualitative data.

Goal 2:

2.a. Identify and analyze significant historical issues and situations in
Luzerne County history from the 17th through the 20th centuries as they relate
to issues in contemporary life.

Goal 3:

3.a. Manage information. This involves such things as sorting data, ranking
data for significance, identifying and synthesizing facts, concepts, and
principles.

3.b. Understand and use organizing principles or key concepts to evaluate
miscellaneous data.

3.c. Form questions in order to clarify clearly a problem, topic, or issue

3.d. Compare and contrast the relative merits of opposing arguments and
interpretations.

3.e. Organize thoughts and communicate them clearly and concisely in written
form.

Goal 4:

4.a. Identify and analyze significant contemporary issues and situations as
they as they reflect the historical impact of earlier civilizations.



**

Sequence of Topics** :

1\. Local History as a Field of Study

2\. Luzerne County's Geography, Geology, and Demography

3\. Frontier Community: Woodlands Era, Early Settlement to 1800

4\. Luzerne County, 1800-1850: Half Century of Transition

5\. The Anthracite Coal Industry in Luzerne County: Its Growth and Decline

6\. Luzerne County, 1850-1920: Prosperity and Diversity

7\. Luzerne County, 1920-1950: Depression, War, Politics, and Tribulations of
Economic Diversification

8\. Luzerne County, 1960-Present: Metamorphosis



Assessment and Grading:

The following are acceptable assessment methods for this course.

1\. Exams: all exams will contain both objective and essay questions focusing
on reading assignments and classroom lecture content.

2\. Text Reading Assignment Quizzes

3\. Documented Writing Assignments

4\. Group Projects

5\. Research Paper

6\. Class Participation and Attendance

7\. Open Computer Laboratory Activities



**

Reference, Resources, and Learning Materials:**

Required Texts:

1\. Paul J. Zbiek, _Luzerne County: History of the People and Culture_
(Available in the LCCC Bookstore)

2\. Sheldon Spear, _Revisiting Wyoming Valley History_ (Available in the LCCC
Bookstore)

3\. Sally Teller Lottick, _Bridging Change: A Wyoming Valley Sketchbook_
(Available in the LCCC Bookstore)

4\. In addition to the texts, various reading materials, documents, and visual
materials designed to complement the text and course lectures will be
distributed throughout the semester. Students will be responsible for the
content of these materials for class discussion and selected questions on the
in-class examinations.

Additional References:

R.I. Moore, ed., _A Historical Atlas of the World

_

W. Langer, ed., _An Encyclopedia of World History

_

J. Gibaldi, _MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers

_

_Webster's Guide to American History

_

J.T. Adams and R.V. Coleman, eds., _Dictionary of American History_ K.T.
Jackson, ed., _Atlas of American History

_

R.B. Morris, ed., _Dictionary of American Biography

_

D.E. Kyvig and M.A. Mary, _Nearby History

_

R.E. Butchhart, _Local Schools: Exploring Their History

_

B.J. Howe, et.al., _Houses and Homes: Exploring Their History

_

G.A. Danzer, _Public Places: Exploring Their History

_

C. Kammen, _On Doing Local History

_

J.A. Burns, _Recording Historic Structures

_









  **

Required Equipment** : None



**

Computer Software** : None



**

Other Course Requirements** : None









