**Computer Generation of Virtual Brains   (Special Topics Psyc 592/461 -
Cross-listed with CSI 739)**

  
**SYLLABUS     \---    Spring 2002**![](bic.JPG)  
Thursday 1:30pm - 4:10pm

[FINAL  EXAM  POSTED  HERE](M461_02/finalexam.html) (due 5/9 @4:15pm)

_**Prerequisites:** PSYC 372 (grade of B+ or better) or CSI 734 , or
permission of instructor._

**Contents:** This course examines selected topics in neuroscience using
computational modeling as the methodological approach. After a brief overview
of neuronal function and activity, fundamental principles of brain structure
and function at the system level will be examined. The design and application
of computer models will be focussed mainly on the understanding of nervous
systems properties as they emerge from assemblies of neurons. The course also
introduces computational neuroanatomy and the study of biological neural
network models. Finally, we will discuss some philosophical issues related to
the potential implementation of accurate brain models in software.

**Optional textbook:** "Neurobiology", 3rd ed., by GordonM. Shepherd (Oxford
Press)

**Instructor:** Dr. [Giorgio
Ascoli](http://www.krasnow.gmu.edu/ascoli/index.html)  \- Ph. x3-4383, E-mail:
[ascoli@gmu.edu](mailto:ascoli@gmu.edu)  
Office location: Krasnow Institute, Rm. 217 ([click here for campus
location](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/krasnow/map_zoom.htm))  
Office hours: Monday 3-4p, Thursday 12-1p, or by appointment.

**Method of instruction and evaluation:** Weekly lectures will be divided in
two portions of approximately 1hr15min, with a 10min break in the middle.
Student attendance and participation is _strongly_ encouraged (with questions
and discussions during class). "Homework" thought questions are _optional_ and
their main purpose is to serve as a means for self-evaluation. However,
exceptionally good answers may be counted towards a better final grade.
Towards the end of the course, each student is required to present (orally) a
project proposal outlining a strategy to build and test a virtual model of a
brain sub-structure. Project presentations will be 20-30 minutes long and
should be self-consistent and effective. Students are advised to meet me
during office hours to review their proposal before the presentation. The
final exam will be take-home and in essay format (in the style of thought
questions assigned throughout the semester). Final grades will be based on the
following components: class participation 30%; project presentation: 35%;
final   exam: 35%.

**Class schedule by (approximate) subject.**

[**1) Jan 24** \- Introduction](M461_02/classone.htm) and overview of the
course. Nervous systems and brains. Perception and behavior. Basic
neuroanatomy. The structure of neuronal cells.

[**2) Jan 31** \- An overview of neuronal
electrophysiology:](M461_02/Cla2.html) passive cable and active conductance;
signal integration and transmission. Analogic VS digital information. Why
single-neuron morphology?

[**3) February 7** \- Computational Neuroanatomy I:](M461_02/Cla3.html) Local
approaches to neuronal morphology - Hillman algorithm and Burke algorithm.
Dendritic orientation and tropism. Turtle-graphics and L-Neuron.

[**4) February 14** \- Computational Neuroanatomy II:](M461_02/Cla4.html)
Topological and population-based approaches to neuronal morphology. Van Pelt's
algorithm and Senft's ArborVitae. Network connectivity; modes of axonal
navigation; adaptive systems. Principles of neural development.

[**5) February 21** \- Principles of artificial neural
networks:](http://www.shef.ac.uk/psychology/gurney/notes/contents.html) from
McCulloch and Pitts' Threshold Logic Unit (TLU) to Hopfield's associative
nets. [ **Today's handout** consists of an excellent web resources on neural
networks: [Dr. Gurney's "Neural
Nets"](http://www.shef.ac.uk/psychology/gurney/notes/contents.html)].

[**6) February 28** \- Guest lecture: Bruce
Gluckman](http://complex.gmu.edu/neural/personnel/gluckman.html) "Controlling
brain activity with electric fields".

**[7) March 7](M461_02/Cla7.html) ** \- In the first half: Sensory I:
Olfaction and chemical detection. Audition and other mechanical senses. In the
second half: A review of the Human Brain Project: Neuroinformatics in the
third millennium. **Also today:** What your project proposals should look
like.

_March 10-17 Spring Break_

[**8) March 21 -** Sensory II: Towards artificial eyes. The
Retina](M461_02/Cla8.html) and the visual pathway; retina in silica; pattern
recognition.

[**9) March 28** \- Guest lecture: Kenneth DeJong](http://cs.gmu.edu/~eclab/)
"Evolutionary computation".

[**10) Apr 4** \- Information Processing I: Motor
systems:](M461_02/Cla10.html) spinal cord, motor cortex, cerebellum. Reflexes
and movement control. The computational problem of motor coordination.
Mammalian movement and Boeing 747s.

[**11) Apr 11** Information Processing II: Hippocampus and neocortical
pathways](M461_02/Cla11.html); the representation problem; learning and
memory. Modeling synaptic plasticity. The role of NMDA receptors.

**12) Apr 18** \- Project presentations I - Discussion, feedback.

**13) Apr 25** \- Project presentations II - Discussion, feedback.

[**14) May 2** -](http://www.u.arizona.edu/~chalmers/online.html) Review of
the course material - Questions and Answers. [Philosophical
issues](http://www.u.arizona.edu/~chalmers/online.html): epistemology and
ethics of virtual brains.

_[Take-home exam (beginning 4:30PM on May 2): Turn in by 4:15PM on May
9.](M461_02/finalexam.html)_

[Dr. Ascoli's Home Page](http://www.krasnow.gmu.edu/ascoli/index.html)  
[Psyc 372 "Physiological Psychology"
syllabus](http://www.krasnow.gmu.edu/ascoli/Teaching/Psyc372_01/index.html)  
[The Computational Neuroanatomy Group at the Krasnow
Institute](http://www.krasnow.gmu.edu/ascoli/CNG/index.htm)

