**PSYC 372-004 _PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY (3:3:0)_**

_Prerequisites: PSYC 100 (grade of C or better) and BIOL 103-104, or
permission of instructor._ Survey of Neuroscience, including basic
neuroanatomy, neural and synaptic transmission, neural mechanisms underlying
normal and abnormal behavior, and biological mechanisms of drug action.

![](icon372.JPG)**SYLLABUS     -    FALL 2001**  
Thursday 1:30pm - 4:10pm  Robinson B111

Instructor: Dr. [Giorgio Ascoli](http://www.krasnow.gmu.edu/ascoli/index.html)  
Krasnow Institute, Rm. 217  
Ph. x3-4383  
E-mail: [ascoli@gmu.edu](mailto:ascoli@gmu.edu)

Office Hours: Monday 3:00pm - 4:00pm, Thursday 12 noon - 1:00pm, or by
appointment.

Text: Kalat, Biological Psychology, 7th ed. (mandatory) and Hull's "Kalat
Study Guide" (optional).  
Additional material and reference book: Kandel-Schwartz-Jessel, Principles of
Neural Science (optional).

Exam policies, grades, and honor code.

**Method of instruction:** Weekly lectures will be divided in two portions of
approximately 1hr15min, with a 10min break in the middle. Student
participation is strongly encouraged (with questions and discussions during
class). Class attendance is _very warmly_ advised. Homeworks and papers (see
below) are by all means part of the course. **Important:** I expect all
students to be willing/able to use e-mail and internet access (e.g. Netscape
or Explorer). All handouts, homeworks, and class-related notices WILL BE
POSTED on the web at [this
link:](http://www.krasnow.gmu.edu/ascoli/Teaching/Psyc372_01/index.html)
http://www.krasnow.gmu.edu/ascoli/Teaching/Psyc372_01/index.html (case
sensitive!). Online handouts are clearly not meant as a substitute for coming
to class, but they will give you an idea of what will be/has been covered in
each lecture, as well as provide additional material, web-links, etc. Please
read handouts before class.

**Class schedule by (approximate) subject: follow links for handouts, homework
assignment, additional material, etc.**

[1) Aug 30    **Introduction: Why physiological psychology? The
neuron:**](Cla1.html) dendrites, axons and synapses; types of neurons; glia
_(Chaps 1, 2)._

[2) Sep 6    **Neural impulses:**](Cla2.html) input integration; ionic
conductance; excitation and inhibition; action potential; synaptic
transmission _(Chaps 2, 3)._

[3) Sep 13    **Chemistry and Synapses:**](Cla3.html)neurotransmitters;
transduction; psychoactive drugs; hormones and pheromones _(Chap 3)._

[ANSWERS to class 2 homework questions](hw2.html)

[4) Sep 20    **Anatomy of the nervous system:**](Cla4.html) numbers and
terminology; spinal cord and brain; forebrain; cerebral cortex _(Chap 4)._
First Review Session + Q&A _(Chaps 2-4)._

Practical partial exam #1: [See end of class 4 handout](Cla4.html#ASSIGNMENTS)

[ANSWERS to class 3 homework questions](hw3.htm)

NOTES: (1) There WILL NOT be office hours next Monday and Thursday (9/24 and
/27). If you want to see me next week, please [make an
appointment](mailto:ascoli@gmu.edu) for Tuesday or Wednesday (9/25 and 9/26).
(2) Your class 3 homeworks are in an envelope by my mailbox in the Mailroom of
David King Bldg (Psyc Dept).

[5) Sep 27    Partial Exam #1. In the second half: **Movement:**](Cla5.html)
motor cortex and other motor control areas; the case of the cerebellum; spinal
cord and the neuromuscolar junctions _(Chap 8)._

[ANSWERS to multiple questions of Partial Exam #1](exam1ans.htm)

[6) Oct 4    **Vision:**](Cla6.html) retina; rods and cones; other cell types;
lateral inhibition and receptive fields; lateral geniculate; V1, V2, through
V6; visual processing; color, shape, motion and depth _(Chap 6)._

[ANSWERS to class 5 homework questions](hw5.html)

[7) Oct 11    **Mechanical Sensory Systems:**](Cla7.html) audition;
somatosensation; pain  _(Chap 7)_.

[ANSWERS to class 6 homework questions](hw6.html)

[8) Oct 18    **Chemical Senses:**](Cla8.html) olfaction and taste; Second
Review Session + Q&A (Chaps 6-8)

Practical partial exam #2: [See end of class 8 handout](Cla8.html#ASSIGNMENTS)

[ANSWERS to class 7 homework questions](hw7.html)

[9) Oct 25](Cla9.htm)    **** Partial Exam #2. In the second half: **[Emotions
and stress:](Cla9.htm) ** fear and the amygdala; anxiety and benzodiazepines.
_(Chap12)_

[ANSWERS to multiple questions of Partial Exam #2](exam2mp_ans.htm)

[10) Nov 1   **Learning and Memory:**](Cla10.html)associative VS. non-
associative neuroplasticity; habituation and sensitization; classical and
operant conditioning; short and long-term memory; the case of the hippocampus
_(Chap 13)._

[ANSWERS to class 9 homework questions](hw9.html)

[11) Nov 8   **Higher cognitive functions:**](Cla11.html) Integration of
perception and binding; abstraction, language and concepts; lateralization.
_(Chap 14)_. Also: Movies shown today!

[12) Nov 15   **Oscillations, Sleep, and Dreams:**](Cla12.html) Pace-making
cells and circuits; rythms and eeg; epilepsy; sleep and dreaming ( _Chap 9)._
Third Review Session + Q&A _(Chaps 9, 12-14)._

Practical partial exam #3: [See end of class 12
handout](Cla12.html#ASSIGNMENTS)

[ANSWERS to class 10 homework questions](hw10.htm)

**November 22 No class -- Thanksgiving day week.**

[ANSWERS to class 11 homework questions](hw11.html)

[13) Nov 29](Cla13.html)    Partial Exam #3. In the second half: **[Physiology
and Philosophy of Consciousness](Cla13.html)** (handouts only).

![](icon_new.gif) [Forthcoming course (Spring 2002): Computer Generation of
Virtual Brains (Psyc 461 / 592 - Special Topics)](../index_461_02.htm)

[ANSWERS to multiple questions of Partial Exam #3](exam3mp_ans.htm)

[14) Dec 6    **Mental Disorders:**](Cla14.html)Brain damage and neural
degeneration; aging and apoptosis; schizophrenia _(Chap 15)_. Final Review
Session + Q &A _(Chaps 1-4, 6-9, 12-14, 16)._

**FINAL EXAM:** Thursday 12/13 @ 1:30 p.m. - 4:15 p.m.

[Dr. Ascoli's Home Page](http://www.krasnow.gmu.edu/ascoli/index.html)

**Exam policies, grades, and honor code:**

There will be three non-cumulative "partial exams" plus a final _cumulative_
exam. All exams are _in-class_ , _closed-books_ , and will consist of _both_
multiple choice _and_ essay questions. Partial exams will be 75-minute long,
while the final will be 2.5-hr long. Your grade will be based on the best
three of your four exams. This means that your lowest grade will be dropped.
If you miss an exam for any reason, that will be the exam dropped. _There will
not be any makeups!_ If you are satisfied with your average grade after the
three partial exams, you need not take the final. If the three best grades are
from partial exams, they will each have a 33% weight. If they are from the
final and two partial exams, the final will weigh 50% and the partial exams
25% each.

Homeworks and papers _will_ have an effect on your final grade as well.
Homeworks will be assigned after each class except the weeks before exams.
Homeworks _must_ be turned in within a week of assignment, and _will not_ be
accepted later than that. Each skipped homework will penalize your final grade
by 1%. _Poor homeworks will not affect your final grades_ (although extremely
bad ones may be considered as skipped). However, they should suggest that more
effort and possibly an office hour visit are required on that subject. A
particularly good homework may be taken into account to improve the
instructor's judgement of your exam performance in corresponding subjects.
Homeworks are _open-books_ , and an indication of the suggested time required
to complete the assignements will be included to allow self-evaluation.
Homeworks may be turned in by email.

You are encouraged to group up to study the material and to organize review
sessions and practice exams. However, all the exams and the homeworks must be
your own work, i.e. no collaborative effort is allowed in exam performances!

Papers: you are required to submit a brief report (1-2 typed pages) on a news
item in the recent press (newspapers or magazines in 2001) related to this
course. The original "source" article must be attached to the paper. Papers
may be turned in at any time during the course before the last day of classes.
If you do not complete this requirement, your final grade will be penalized by
10%. Very good papers can receive up to 10% extra credit. Papers can be
written in group. However, when more than one student authors a paper, the
number of papers must sum up to the number of students (i.e. a group of three
will have to turn in a total of three papers during the semester, etc.).
Papers may be submitted electronically as long as the original source article
is also electronic (emailed or referenced as a web address).

