![](../kennedylogo.jpg)

* * *

**PSYC 5431G, Experimental Developmental**

**Fall, 2000  
**

  
**OFFICE** : 2052 MPP Building

**HOURS** : 2:00 - 3:00 TTF, 3:30 - 5:00 W, or by appointment

**PHONE NOS**.: 681-5504 (Office); 681-0869 (Lab)

**E-MAIL** : JKENNEDY@gasou.edu

**WEBSITE** : www2.gasou.edu:80/facstaff/jkennedy

**GRAD. ASST.:** Kelli Taylor  
  

**PREREQUISITES** : PSYC 1101, 3140, 3141, and either 3331, 3333 or permission
of instructor  
  

**TEXTS** :

  * Miller, S. A. (1998). Developmental research methods. (2nd ed.) Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
  * American Psychological Association. (1994) Publication Manual. (4th ed.). Washington, D.C.: APA.
  * Additional reading assignments will be made throughout the semester as appropriate. (See attached additional reading assignments.)  
  

**COURSE DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES:** This is a laboratory course that
provides the graduate psychology student with an in-depth examination of
research methods in developmental psychology through both classroom and
laboratory instruction in particular areas of study. We will examine
appropriate research methods in infancy, childhood, adolescence, and old age.
An independent research project is required that examines an issue in
developmental psychology. Goals are to familiarize you with the
methodological, practical, and ethical issues confronted in conducting
research in developmental psychology, provide exposure to important research
areas within the field, and foster skills for critically evaluating research.  
  

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS AND TESTS:**  
  
1\. Research Project

An independent research project is required. You will choose a research topic
of interest to you, write a research proposal, complete a review of relevant
literature, collect and analyze your data, and write up your results in APA
style. An oral or poster presentation will be made to the class. This project
accounts for 30% of your grade.  
  
2\. Review Paper

A review paper on a relevant developmental topic will be required. Each
student will be assigned a topic to cover that is of contemporary interest.
Papers will be graded on organization, clarity, adequacy of coverage of the
relevant literature, and critical evaluation of what you have read. This
project accounts for 15% of your grade.  
  
3\. Labs

Labs will be conducted which prepare you for your own data collection in the
research project described above. These will involve evaluating published
research, practice in behavioral observation and establishing reliability,
from both videotaped and live observations. Labs account for 10% of your
grade.  

4\. Exams

There will be two tests and a final exam: each accounting for 10% of your
grade. They will consist of essay and short-answer questions. The exams will
be both applied and theoretical in content. The tests and final will be based
on lectures, class discussions, and assigned readings.  
  
5\. Relevance Paper

A paper in which the relevance of theory, methodology, and research covered in
the course through textbook readings, assigned articles, and lectures is
evaluated with regard to the student's professional goals and interests is
required. The paper should be submitted in APA style. A presentation to the
class is required. The paper and presentation accounts for 15% of your grade
in the course.  

Late papers will be accepted, but a penalty of one letter grade per day will
be assigned.  

**GRADES:** In summary, each of the above assignments account for the portion
of your grade indicated below.  

Research Project 30%

Review Paper 15%

Test 1 10%

Test 2 10%

Final Exam 10%

Labs 10%

Relevance Paper 15%  
  

Grades will be assigned as follows:  
  
A 90-100

B 80-89

C 70-79

D 60-69

F Below 60  
  
  
**ADMINISTRIVIA:** I am very interesting in your getting a lot out of this
course and hope that you enjoy it as well. I will be happy to discuss
questions related to the course during my office hours. If you are not free
during my office hours, we can schedule a meeting at a mutually convenient
time. Generally, when my office door is open, I am happy to see you. However,
when my door is closed, it is a signal that I prefer not to be disturbed or am
not in. I would especially appreciate not being interrupted during the half-
hour before a class when I am reviewing my notes and getting ready for class.  
  
The success of this course depends heavily on everyone's participation in
class.  

Cases of academic dishonesty are dealt with according to policies outlined in
the Student Handbook. You should note that the minimum penalty requires a
grade of "0" for the assigned task and academic probation for one semester for
a first offense. Academic dishonesty involves representing any work turned in
(whether tests, papers, labs, etc.) completed in any part by others as your
own. (See attached Academic Dishonesty Policies for more specific
information.)  

* * *

Supplemental Reading List

Fall, 2000

Experimental Developmental Psychology  
  

**General  
  
**

Segal, J. (1989). Ten myths about child development. Parents, July, pp. 81-84,
87.  
  

**Infancy  
  
**

Ainsworth, M. D. S. (1970). Attachment, exploration, and separation:
Illustrated by the behavior of one-year-olds in a strange situation. Child
Development, 41, 49-67.  
  

Belsky, J. (1988). Nonmaternal care in the first year of life and the security
of infant-parent attachment. Child Development, 59, 157-167.  
  

Kagan, J., Reznick, J. S., & Snidman, N. (1988). Biological bases of childhood
shyness. Science, 240, 167-171.  
  

Main, M., & George, C. (1985). Responses of abused and disadvantaged toddlers
to distress in agemates: A study in the day care setting. Developmental
Psychology, 21, 407-412.  
  

NICHD Early Child Care Research Network. (1999). Child care and mother-child
interaction in the first 3 years of life. Developmental Psychology, 35,
1399-1413.  
  

NICHD Early Child Care Research Network. (1998). Relations between family
predictors and child outcomes: Are they weaker for children in child care?
Developmental Psychology, 34, 1119-1128.  
  

NICHD Early Child Care Research Network. (1998). Early child care and self-
control, compliance, and problem behavior at twenty-four and thirty-six
months. Child Development, 69, 1145-1170.  
  

Skinner, B. F. (1945, October). Baby in a box. Ladies' Home Journal. (HO)  
  

Watson, J. B., & Rayner, R. (1920). Conditional emotional reactions. Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 3, 1-14.  
  

**Childhood  
  
**

Gorman, C. (1997). A boy without a penis. Time, March 24, p. 83.  
  

Maccoby, E. E. (1990). Gender and relationships: A developmental account.
American Psychologist, 45, 513-520.



Patterson, G. R., DeBaryshe, B. D., & Ramsey, E. (1989). A developmental
perspective on antisocial behavior. American Psychologist, 44, 329-335.  
  

**Adolescence  
  
**

Bartholomew, K., Horowitz, L. M. (1991). Attachment styles among young adults:
A test of a four-category model. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
61, 226-244.  
  

Waterman, A. S. (1982). Identity development from adolescence to adulthood: An
extension of theory and a review of the literature. Developmental Psychology,
18, 341-358.  
  

**Old Age  
  
**

Skinner, B. F. (1983). Intellectual self-management in old age. American
Psychologist, 38, 239-244.

