 Syllabus: Psyc 5050.001

                                   _** Tim Lane, Ph.D.                **_

* * *

**_Purpose_ of course:**   This course is a _pre_ -practicum course in
counseling skills, therefore it is a **practical** skills development course.
Emphasis is put on learning to establish a therapeutic alliance and
professional relationship, develop and integrate micro-counseling skills,
enhance self-awareness, maximize learning from supervision, consider
therapeutic choice points, and manage interpersonal dynamics during the
session.  This course is designed to compliment your other coursework and
experiences, being a place where you have the opportunity to integrate
disparate course information into smoother assessments, interactions, and
interventions with clients.

* * *

_

**Format**_ **of the course:** This course will be taught primarily as a
laboratory course, with experiential and discussion components, group and
lecture presentations, and text/article readings being the primary tools used
for learning. In-class participation in the exercises and discussions is
required of all students. Video-taping is utilized as a teaching/supervision
tool to help students practice and demonstrate skills.

* * *

**Personal Issues:** **** In the development of competent therapists it is
common that _Personal_ issues are often exposed during training.   This should
be seen as an impetus for personal growth in these areas is necessary, and
failure to do so can restrict the therapists effectiveness or professionalism.
Therefore, students are highly encouraged to address/explore personal
reactions and issues (only) as relevant to the topics and exercises.  Each
student is also expected to help create an accepting and supportive
environment for peers to address these issues. **(NOTE: When personal issues
emerge, as an ethical professional, you are expected to deal with these
issues, preferably in your own personal counseling/therapy with outside
professionals. Therapy for the therapist is a wonderful and helpful, if not
necessary, learning tool!)**

* * *

**Grading:** **Grading will be based on:**

**1) Thoughtful and _prompt_ completion of assignments and readings. 2).
**Active** participation in class discussions and group process while
demonstrating understanding of the material presented. 3) **Skill** levels
attained as _demonstrated_ by activities/tapes/assignments. 4) _Due to the
nature of the course, Attendance  is required,_ absences will affect grades*.
5) Midterm and Finals Tests may be given on readings, lectures and
discussion**

***Note: After one grace absence, for each 2(two) absences the grade will be
lowered one letter grade,(i.e. with the third absence, the students grade will
be lowered one letter, (i.e. from A to B; and then the 5th absence results in
2 letter grade deduction.) Consult the instructor if you have questions about
this.   Taking an "Incomplete" is not feasible for this course.**

* * *

**Required Text:**

     **Murphy, B.C. & Dillon, C. (1998).   _Interviewing in action_.   Pacific Grove, CA/Brooks/Cole.**

    **Sommers-Flanagan, R. & Sommers-Flanagan, J. (1999) _Clinical interviewing.2nd edition_.   New York/Wiley.**

** And Other Readings will be assigned.

_**Optional** but Recommended Readings and Resources:  _  

     Brammer, L.M. & MacDonald, G. (1999). _The Helping Relationship (7th Edition)._ Boston: Allyn  & Bacon 

     Eagan, G. (1994). _The skilled helper: a problem-management approach to helping (fifth edition)._ Pacific Grove, Ca: Brooks/Cole. 

     Gordon, R. L. (1992).  _Basic Interviewing Skills._ Prospect Heights, Il: Waveland Press, Inc.

    Ivey, A. E. & Gluckstern (1984). _Basic influencing skills (second Ed)._ North Amhearst, Mass: Microtraining Associates.

    Ivey, A. E., Gluckstern, N. B. & Ivey, M. B.(1984). _Basic attending skills (third ed.)._ North Amhearst, Mass: Microtraining Associates.

     Ivey, A.E. and Ivey, M.B. (1999). _Intentional Interviewing & Counseling: Facilitating client development in a multicultural society (4th ed.)_ Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole

     Kottler, J. A. (1986). _On being a therapist_. San Francisco: Josey/Bass.

     Mahoney, M. (1991).  _Change Processes: The scientific foundations of psychotherapy._   Basic Books. 

     Teyber, E. (1992). _Interpersonal Process in Psychotherapy._ New York: Dorsey Press 

     Wachtel, P. L. (1993). _Therapeutic Communication_ , New York: Guilford Press, 

* * *

**Disability accommodations:**

**** The Department of Psychology cooperates with the Office of Disability
Accommodation (ODA) to make reasonable accommodations for _qualified_ students
with disabilities (cf. Americans with Disabilities Act and Section 504,
Rehabilitation Act). If you have not registered with the ODA, we encourage you
to do so. Please present your written Accommodation Request to you instructor
on or before the 12th class day. If you experience any problems in getting
reasonable accommodations, please contact the Psychology Department Liaison or
the ODA. Also, the Department complies with the University's policies
concerning discrimination and sexual harassment. If you have any concerns or
complaints please contact the departmental chairperson or UNT's Equal
Opportunity Office.**

* * *

**Back to the top                                             ![Hit
Counter](../_vti_bin/fpcount.exe/tlane/?Page=psyc5050/Syllabus5050.htm|Image=2|Digits=4)**

[Psyc.Dept](http://www.psyc.unt.edu)  
[Tim Lane's home page](../index.htm) | Page maintained by [Tim Lane
Ph.D.](mailto:Lane@dsa.admin.unt.edu)  
Last Updated: August 27, 2001  
---|---  
  


Psychology 5050 Pre-Practicum

Fall 2001          Reading Schedule

Week # |

Interviewing In Action |

Clinical Interviewing  
---|---|---  
  
1 |

- | 

-  
  
2 |

Chptr 1-2 Labor Day |

1  
  
3 |

3 |

2  
  
4 |   |

3  
  
5 |

4 |

4  
  
6 |   |

5  
  
7 |

5 |

6  
  
8 |

6 |

7  
  
9 |

7 |

8  
  
10 |

8 |

9  
  
11 |

9 |

10  
  
12 |

10 |

11  
  
13 |

11 |  
  
14 |

12 |  
  
15 |   |  
  
16 |

Finals week |  
  
PRE-PRACTICUM



PSYC5050. Instructor: Tim Lane, Ph.D.

Time: M. 10-11:50 Office:Counseling& Testing Center

TH 180 Phone: 565-2741 or 2419

Office Hours: 11-12 am Mon-Fri.

or by appointment.



Format of course: This course will be taught primarily as a laboratory course,
with experiential components being a primary tool used for learning. Readings
will be assigned and must be read before class time, because.... Participation
in the exercises and discussions is expected of all students. There may be
objective tests given over class and reading materials. Audio and Video taping
will be expected as assignments. Both Group and Individual supervision may be
employed as learning tools.



Focus of course: As the first practicum in counseling/therapy, the focus will
be on the development of the basic interpersonal interviewing, and counseling
skills of each student. My experience indicates that personal issues may arise
during this course, and openness to exploring personal issues is critical to
student's development as a counselor/therapist. Therefore, students are highly
encouraged to address/explore personal reactions and issues as relevant to the
topics and exercises.



Grading: Grading will be based on

1) prompt completion of assignments;

2) active and open participation in class discussions and

group process, with a willingness to receive feedback

3) skill level attained as demontrated by

activites/assignments (i.e. video tapes)

4) Attendance is required, with misses affecting your final

grade. If you must miss class for emergency reasons,

please call and let me know.

5) Tests given over lecture and readings.



Text: Interpersonal Process in Psychotherapy.

Author: Edward Teyber.

Publisher: Dorsey Press

Cormier & Cormier- see Vickie Campbell's class text-

Additional Handouts or readings will be required.















First 6 weeks Outline:



Course outline:



WEEK 1. Introductions and discussion of class expectations.

#1 Homework assignment given. Reading schedule given.



First tape needs to be started. Go to the Psychology Clinic, and find out how
to tape... and simply make a tape of what you think a counselor **should** do
in a counseling session with a new client.



WEEK 2. No class, see readings to be completed this week.





Week 3. Homework assignment #1 due with discussion. Class

Exercise. #2 homework assignment given.

The 1st Tape is Due!

Discuss readings: Start 2nd tape.



WEEK 4. #2 Homework assignment due with discussion. Readings

discussed. Didactic lecture...then Tape #2 Reviewed.



WEEK 5. More didactic lecture/discussion: Readings discussed. Tapes Reviewed
#2.

Start 2nd round of taping after your first one has been reviewed.





WEEK 6. Reading assignments discussed. More didactic lecture.

2nd round of tapes Reviewed.



WEEK 7. Tapes reviewed, discussion, test prep.



Week 8 or 9. Exam over readings and lecture. The rest of the semester will be
set later, similar to the first 5 weeks, with focus on making and reviewing
tapes, doing readings, and class discussion.



Additional Class Requirement!!

NOTE: During one of these first 5 sessions, Dr. Schneider will attend class
and discuss make your Plan of Study. The Plan of Study is due to be submitted
before the end of the semester. This is important and I'm making it an
assignment of this class. Plans of study can be changed with your advisor's
permission, so this isn't limiting your options. We will use occasional class
time to help with this project as needed.



**Homework Assignment #1**

Due Second session (Week 3) of class. Each of the following questions should
be addressed independently. The entire paper should be about four to six pages
in length (typed, double spaced, 1.5" margins, spelling at least close and
NEAT: welcome to graduate school!).

Part 1. Answer the following thoughtfully:



1\. Think about a couple of your favorite people. What do you find attractive
about these? Write down as many features or attributes you can think of that
make you like in other people. (PPlllleeeeese! you can leave out the specific
body parts!!)



2\. If _YOU_ were seeking a counselor for yourself, what personal qualities
would you want that therapist to have? _Compare_ and _contrast_ these to your
list in #1.



3\. When you share a problem with others, how do these people (i.e. friends)
let you know that s/he understands you and your personal predicament or
problem?



4\. Think about a time when you felt that you were not understood by someone
when you tried to explain to them your feelings or problems... What was it
like for you and how did it feel?..., decribe what it was that gave you the
impression they didn't get it.  

**Homework Assignment#2**

Answer the following:



1\. Explain in detail your understanding of _your_ motivation to be a
counselor/therapist. Why this field now? (I bet you think you know what you're
getting yourself into!!) These are very personal issues, but please share as
much as you feel comfortable with.



2\. Please examine the role you've played in your family of origin and in
relationships with other friend/relatives. How might this affect your
motivation to go into counseling as a career?



3\. Now that you got all that **" being altruistic" and "warm fuzzies"** stuff
out of the way, I want you to get real for a second, and examine what NEEDS,
WANTS or (Unresolved?) ISSUES **you** might try or hope to deal with by being
a counselor/therapist. This is a much harder excercise in that it requires
brutal self-awareness and honestly! (A hint could be issues such as feelings
of importance, needing to be "the helper" rather than getting helped, needs
for power, need for control, need for more information to fix self, fixing
others/being other focused as a way of avoiding dealing with own
issues....etc.)



4\. What might you consider your personal (a.) strengths and (b.) liabilities
as a counselor/therapist? (please, no quaint interview responses- your already
in the program )











