**Humanities 1010:**

**Introduction to Art and Music in Western Civilization**

**4 credits**

**Spring Summer 2000 - Call No. 65526 Section 001**

**8:00 - 10:10 MW, 1151 Old Main (NOTE PERMANENT NEW ROOM LOCATION)**

* * *



Click on the following links to view details of this course

Instructor  
Course Objectives  
General Education Program Requirements  
Course Text  
Class schedule  
Course Requirements  
[Most Recent Posting of Grades](grades65526.html)  

[Study Sheet Format - WordPerfect](wpStudy.doc)  
[Study Sheet Format Microsoft Word](Study.doc)  
[Exam 1 Study Guide](exam1_study.html)  
[Museum Project Assignment and Format](MuseumProject.html)  
[Exam 2 Study Guide](exam2_study65526.html)  

[Slides for review](slides.html)

Or:  
[Return to Jenkins' Home Page](../index.htm)

* * *

**Instructor** : Mark Jenkins, 577-6923 - 51 W. Warren, 4th floor

Office Hours: Generally, after class and by appointment

email: [mark.jenkins@wayne.edu](mailto:mark.jenkins@wayne.edu)

* * *

**Common Course Objectives of HUM 1010:**

_Introduction to Art and Music in Western Civilization,_ which satisfies the
Visual and Performing Arts component of the General Education Requirements, is
intended to give an overview of art, music and ideas from major periods in the
history of Western Civilization.

The objectives for Humanities 1010 are:

(1) To survey a broad representative sampling of major monuments of Western
artistic expression in a variety of fields, principally architecture,
painting, sculpture, and music, from the Graeco-Roman Period to the Twentieth
Century;

(2) To relate these art works to the cultural, historical, and intellectual
milieu out of which they spring and to bring them into focus around the idea
of a particular _style_ of art and music in each age and place; and

(3) To show the similarities as well as the differences in artistic and
musical expressions from earliest times through subsequent ages and up to the
Twentieth Century.

* * *

**Undergraduate General Education Program**

Humanities 1010 satisfies the Visual and Performing Arts component of the
Humanities Group Requirement in the University and/or College of Liberal Arts
General Education Program.

* * *

**Course Texts** **:** (from Marwil's Bookstore on Cass  & Warren)

Cunningham, Lawrence, and John Reich. _Culture and Values: A Survey of the
Western Humanities_ , Alternative Volume, 4th ed. New York and Orlando, Fla.:
Harcourt Brace, 1997.

Holmes, Ira. _Introduction to the Humanities: A Study Guide_. Second Edition.
New York and Orlando, Fla.: Harcourt Brace, 1997. (This is now included with
the above text. Used copies may not include this, but students will still need
to obtain a copy.)

**Additional:**

  * $2 to $4 Admission to DIA (with student I.D.)
  * Possible Course Packet: Available at nominal cost from Humanities Office, 4th Floor, 51 W. Warren.
  * Web-site for music information: <http://www.wwnorton.com/enjoy>   

* * *

**Projected Schedule of Topics** **:**

Assigned readings _(in italics below)_ need to be completed prior to the class
date for which they are listed. Any major adjustments in the syllabus will be
announced well in advance.

  * 5/8: Introduction. Background _(Cunningham: Introduction & Ch. 1)_
  * 5/10: Early Greece & Classical Greece _(Cunningham, Ch. 2 & 3; Holmes, pp. 11-12, 18-19)_
  * 5/15: Classical Greece & Hellenistic Greece _(Cunningham, Ch. 3; Holmes, 18-19)_
  * 5/17: Hellenistic Greece & Roman _(Cunningham, Ch. 3 & 4; Holmes 18-19, 24-25)_
  * 5/22: Roman _(Cunningham, Ch. 4; Holmes, 24-25)_
  * 5/24: **Slide Exam** & Gothic _(Cunningham, Ch. 8 & 9; Holmes, 52-53, 59-60)_
  * 5/29: **Memorial Day, Class does not meet**
  * 5/31: Gothic _(Cunningham, Ch. 8 & 9; Holmes, 52-53, 59-60)_
  * 6/2: **Day Scheduled as a Monday, Class meets if necessary (announced on 5/31)**
  * 6/5: Early Renaissance _(Cunningham, Ch. 10; Holmes, 68-69)_
  * 6/7: Early & High Renaissance _(Cunningham, Ch. 10 & 11; Holmes, 68-69, 74-75)_
  * 6/12: High Renaissance _(Cunningham, Ch. 11; Holmes, 74-75)_
  * 6/14: Mannerism & Northern Renaissance _(Cunningham, Ch. 11 & 12; Holmes, 74-75, 82-83) _(Time Permitting: In Class Review - _Holmes 27-28, 61-62, and relevant portions of 100-101)_
  * 6/19: **Exam 1 - Study Sheets 1 - 8 (Classical Greek - Northern Renaissance) are due before exam.**
  * 6/21: Baroque _(Cunningham, Ch. 13; Holmes, 91-92)_
  * 6/26: Baroque _(Cunningham, Ch. 13; Holmes, 91-92)_
  * 6/28: 18th Century Styles _(Cunningham, Ch. 14; Holmes, 98-99)_
  * 7/3: **Class meets if necessary (announced on 6/28)**
  * 7/5: 18th century Styles _(Cunningham, Ch. 14; Holmes, 98-99)_
  * 7/10: 19th Century Romanticism _(Cunningham, Ch. 15; Holmes, 108-110)_
  * 7/12: **Slide Exam** & Late 19th Century _(Cunningham, Ch. 16; Holmes, 116-118)_
  * 7/17: Late 19th Century & Early 20th Century _(Cunningham, Ch. 16 & 17; Holmes, 116-118, 125-126)_
  * 7/19: Early 20th Century - **Museum Project Due in class** _(Cunningham, Ch. 17; Holmes, 125-126)_
  * 7/24: The Contemporary Contour _(Cunningham, Ch. 18; Holmes, 132-134)_
  * 7/26: The Contemporary Contour _(Cunningham, Ch. 18; Holmes, 132-134)_ (Time Permitting: In Class Review - _relevant portions of 100-101, 135-136, 143-148_ )

**_Exam 2 (Final)_** **: Monday, July 31, 2000 in usual class location.**

  * **8:00 - 9:30 A.M.**
  * **Study Sheets 9 - 15 (Baroque - Contemporary Contour) are due before exam.**
  * **Final Exam begins** _ **on time -- do not arrive late.**_

**Course Requirements:**

  * **_Attendance for the full class period is required_**. You are responsible for all material presented in class. Attendance will be taken at the beginning (and, occasionally, the end) of each session. **Students who arrive late or leave early will receive no credit for attendance.** In the case of an unavoidable absence, it is your responsibility to obtain all class notes, handouts and announcements from another student. (I will not distribute copies of my lecture notes. Missed handouts may be obtained from me at my office during office hours.) Common courtesy would suggest a phone call to the instructor's office, explaining the reason for your absence. **_Attendance and participation count for 50 points_** of your grade for the course. Two absences are allowed during the semester. Each absence or failure to attend for the full period after these two will lower your grade by 50 points ¡Â the total number of class sessions (roughly 2 points per session). There is no way to make up credit for classes missed. Students who register late for the course cannot make up credit for classes missed.
  * **This is not a correspondence course:** I do not attempt to provide hard copy of all vital instructions, nor can I repeat an entire class for you personally. Often I devote major portions of a class to an explanation of the next assignment: you cannot replicate this experience by email or by a conversation with me or with a classmate. You must be here to get the full value of the course.
  * **_Reading Assignments_** are to be completed in preparation for each class meeting. **_There is important material in the reading which will not be discussed in lecture for which you will be held accountable in exams._** In particular, it will be important to recognize the names of significant artists, art works, architecture, etc. and be able to identify the historical period to which they belong.
  * **_Class Participation_** **:** It is my hope and expectation that students will speak up in class discussions, ask questions and share information they have which might be of interest to the class. From time to time, students may be asked to spend time in small group discussions.
  * **_Two Exams_** will be given, based upon class lectures, class discussions, class slide viewings, class music listenings, and readings from the text. Exams will be composed of (1) Term Identifications, Short Answers, and possibly some True  & False and/or Multiple Choice Questions and (2) some Slide Identifications by "Period" (style). **_Each Exam is worth 110 points, for a total of 220 points_** **.**
  * **_Two Slide Identification Quizzes_** will be given. As with the exams above, slides will be identified by  "Period" (style). **_Each Slide Identification Quiz will be worth 30 points, for a total of 60 points_** **.**
  * **_A Museum Project_** will be given to be done at the Detroit Institute of Arts. This project will consist of a brief paper to be written on a work of art from the middle ages (covered in chapters 5 through 7, which must be read prior to writing the paper) to be selected from a list that will be handed out in class early in the term. **_The museum project will be worth 65 points_** **.**
  * **_Study Sheets_** for each period will be turned in with each exam. The purpose of these sheets is to assist students in assimilating the course materials and in preparing for exams. One study sheet will be turned in for each  "period" (style) covered in class. **_The study sheets will be worth 105 points_** **.**
  * **_Unannounced Quizzes:_** **** There may be unannounced "extra credit pop quizzes" at any time during the semester. The purpose of such quizzes is to encourage students to be regular in attendance and to keep up with the material.
  * **_Writing and Presentation:_** Matters of good college writing and presentation will be considered in Exam, Project and Study Sheet grades.
  * **_Make-Up Exams_** **:** "Make-Ups" are **not given automatically**. The student will be eligible for a  "Make-Up" only if 1) documented evidence of an emergency is presented and 2) the student contacts me before the start of the exam or quiz. I am very strict about these requirements so please do not ask for an exception as none will be granted. If you wake up sick or your car breaks down on your way, call my office. If I am not available someone in our office will answer. The office is usually staffed from 7:45 a.m. and voice mail is available. It is not possible to make-up missed class times. All "Make-Ups," if granted, will be given at the Humanities Office at a time to be announced by the instructor. If a make-up exam is granted, study sheets will be due at the time of the make-up. If a make-up is not granted, study sheets must be turned in at or before the next class session following the missed exam (see below for policy on late projects).
  * **_Late Museum Projects_** **are not accepted automatically.** The student will be eligible to turn in the project late only if 1) documented evidence of an emergency is included with the journal when it is turned in and 2) the student contacts me before the class at which the Project is due. I am very strict about these requirements so please do not ask for an exception as none will be granted. If you wake up sick or your car breaks down on your way, call my office. If I am not available someone in our office will answer. The office is usually staffed from 7:45 a.m. and voice mail is available. In any event, **Late Projects will be reduced 1 letter grade (10 points) for every day late including weekends** \-- to insure fairness to all students. Late papers may be turned to me or the secretary at my office at any time the office is open. To avoid all such difficulties, students are encouraged to turn in projects (directly to me in class or at my office) early.
  * **_Plagiarism_** **:** **Plagiarized work will automatically receive a failing grade for the course.** Direct use of course material, close paraphrase of source material, and resemblances to other students' papers are considered plagiarism. If you use other people's published work, quote and cite it. In the case of resemblances to other students' papers, because it is almost always impossible to determine which paper was the original, both papers will be treated as plagiarized work. Thus, students are advised not to share completed papers with one another.
  * **_Add & Withdrawal Policy:_** Same as university; see schedule of classes. No withdrawals will be granted to students who have committed plagiarism.
  * **_Grading System:_** Current grades will be posted by student ID number on the web site following major assignments and exams. There will be 500 points total for the course achieved from the following:

> Points & Scale:

_Points:_ |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | _Scale:_ |  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
Attendance | 50 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | A | 470 - 500 points  
Slide Quiz 1 | 30 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | A- | 450-469
points  
Exam 1 | 110 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | B+ | 435-449 points  
Slide Quiz 2 | 30 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | B | 420-434 points  
Museum Project | 65 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | B- | 400-419
points  
Study Sheets | 105 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | C+ | 385-399
points  
Final Exam | ___110_ |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | C | 370 - 384
points  
**Total** | **500** |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | C- | 350 - 369
points  
  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | D+ | 335-349 points  
  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | D | 320-334 points  
  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | D- | 300-319 points  
  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | E | 0-299 points  
  
**Note:** I sincerely hope that all will enjoy and do well in this course. I
am available for conferences and discussions about the course materials.

