

Department of **Psychology**







_Professors:_ Barry Bass, Michael Figler, Craig

Johnson, Stuart Miller, Frederick Parente, Herbert Petri,

Jeffrey Sanders, Jan Sinnott

_Associate Professors:_ Janet Anderson, Margaret Faulkner,

Roger Fink, Maria Fracasso (Chair), Lawrence Froman,

John Govern, Thomas Kruggel, Joan Rabin, John Webster

_Assistant Professors:_ Jean Ayers, Susan Bartels, Bethany Brand,

Leonie Brooks, Alan Clardy, M. Paz Galupo,  Jonathan Mattanah,

Bruce Mortenson, Bina Raval, Kim

Shifren, Evangeline Wheeler, Stanley Zweback

_Visiting Associate Professor:_ David Cowie

_Visiting Assistant Professor:_ Laurie Orgel

_Part-time Faculty:_ Joseph Abate, Patricia Alvey, Joelia Anzelc,

Majorie Ashcraft, Marilyn Austin, Philip Burge, John

Clark, Lloyd Collins, Richard Craig, Holly Davani, Paul

Del Nero, Joan Evensen, Sandra Fink, Heather Fox, Julie

Fulcher, James Furukawa, Scott Gehring, Kathleen Grau, John Harris, John

Hickey, Nancy C. Hoffman, Scott Holzman, Kim Houser,

Mark Jacobson, David Jahn, Natasha Kara, Dean R. Kirschner,

Cynthia Larson-Daughtery, Thomas Little, Sara Maggitti,

Evelyn Marx, Lloyd McCraney, Joan McDermott, Mary

Ann Michaloski, Charles Miron, Thomas Monahan,

Arthur Mueller, Alan Nemerofsky, Mark Noider, Michael

Oidick, Kathleen Ratican, Linda Rice, Joyce Rochlin, Gary

Rockwood, Ginny Ready, Henry Scharies, Nancy Shapiro,

Barbara Shue, Frances Spencer, Michael Steinhardt,

Robert Storey, Edward Toyer, Lorraine Ukens, Jessie Ungard,

Karen Webster, Sharon Weiss, Geri Willen, Barbara Wilson







OFFICE

Psychology Building 200, 410-830-2634

Fax: 410-830-3800

[www.towson.edu/~petri/psy-
hpg.html](file:///C:/OPLIMIT/www.towson.edu/~petri/psy-hpg.html)







PROGRAMS OF THE DEPARTMENT

The Department of Psychology offers the following programs: the major in
Psychology, the minor in Psychology, and the Clinical Concentration Program
for Psychology majors.

The major in Psychology prepares students for graduate work in psychology, for
training in special education and general education, for careers requiring a
liberal arts background, and for work in clinical services.







MAJOR IN PSYCHOLOGY

Majors are required to complete 35 credits in Psychology with a grade
equivalent of 2.00 or higher, including 26 credits of required courses and 9
hours of electives (no Pass grades accepted). Of the 26 required credits, 14
are to be completed in the core courses by taking 101 or 102,203 or 204, 212,
and 314. The remaining 12 required credits are to be completed by taking one
course in each of the four topical areas: Human Development, Clinical-Social,
Biopsychology and LearningCognition.







Core Courses (14 credits)

_The following 14 credits are required._

PSYC 101 Introduction to Psychology (3)

or

PSYC 102 Honors Introduction to Psychology (3)

PSYC 203 Human Development (3)

or

PSYC 204 Honors Human Development (3)

PSYC 212 Behavioral Statistics (4)

(Prerequisite - one college math course)

PSYC 314 Experimental Psychology (4)

(Prerequisites: ENGL 102 or 190; PSYC 101 or 102, PSYC 212; PHIL 101 or 110)







Topical Areas (12 credits)

1. Human Development (PSYC 203 is a prerequisite)

_One of the following is required:_

PSYC 403 Psychology of Infancy and Childhood (3)

PSYC 404 Adolescent Psychology (3)

PSYC 405 Psychology of Aging (3)

PSYC 447 Sex Differences: Psychological Perspectives (3)

PSYC 451 Introduction to the Exceptional Child (3)

PSYC 467 Midlife Development (3)







H. Clinical-Social

_One of the following is required:_

PSYC 311 Behavior Modification (3)

PSYC 325 Social Psychology (3)

PSYC 327 Industrial Psychology (3)

PSYC 341 Environmental Psychology (3)

PSYC 350 Personality (3)

PSYC 361 Abnormal Psychology (3)

PSYC 409 Organizational Psychology (3)

PSYC 411 Tests and Measurements (3)

PSYC 421 Applications of Behavioral Principles to Family and Classroom
Environments (3)

PSYC 431 Group Dynamics (3)





III. Biopsychology (BIOL 1 1 0 is a prerequisite)

_one of the following is required:_

PSYC 317 Sensation and Perception (3)

PSYC 460 Ethology and Comparative Psychology (3)

PSYC 465 Physiological Psychology (3)







IV. Leaming-Cognition

_one of the following is required:_

PSYC 305 Psychology of Learning (3)

PSYC 315 Motivation (3)

PSYC 461 Cognitive Psychology (3)







Electives (9 credits)

The remaining 9 elective credits may be selected from any 200-, 300-, or
400-level psychology courses. Electives may include other courses from the
topical areas not selected as requirements or any other psychology course
listed in this catalog with the exception of PSYC 211 and PSYC 230.







CLINICAL CONCENTRATION PROGRAM

The Clinical Concentration Program offers training in Clinical Psychology
leading to a bachelor's degree in Psychology from Towson University and a
certificate in Mental Health from the Education Center of the Sheppard and
Enoch Pratt Hospital. The program provides a four-semester course sequence,
beginning in the first term of the junior year. Courses are organized around
practicum experience with extensive supervision so that there is unbroken
continuity between theory and practice of clinical skills. This is a selective
program for which students must apply by February 25 of their sophomore year.

The curriculum requirements consist of three components: GenEd requirements
and psychology department requirements; two prerequisite courses which must be
completed during the sophomore year and before entry into the program,
Abnormal Psychology and Introduction to the Helping Relationship, and the
following Clinical Concentration Program courses:







SEMESTER 1

PSYC 430 Systems and Techniques of Psychotherapy **** (3)

PSYC 439 The Initial Interview (3)







SEMESTER 2

PSYC 453 Issues in Mental Health Intervention (2)

PSYC 454 Internship in Psychotherapy (4)



<p class=MsoNormal style='tab-stops:0in .8in 1.0in 1.5in 2.0

