Psychology 478/578 Syllabus Psychology 478/578 (1998)  
Sleep and Sleep Disorders  
2:00 - 3:15 PM TTH  
Psychology 306  

[ Richard R. Bootzin](http://w3.arizona.edu/~psych/facsfls/brr.htm)  
[bootzin@u.arizona.edu](mailto:bootzin@u.arizona.edu)  
telephone: 621-7447  
Office hours: 1:15 - 2:00 PM, TTH  
Psychology 217A

Teaching Asssitant:  
[ Peter Franzen](http://w3.arizona.edu/~psych/gradflsa/fp.htm)  
Office hours: TBA  
Psychology 217J  
Tel: 621-9666  
Email: [Franzen@U.Arizona.edu](mailto:franzen@u.arizona.edu)

_last updated: January 22, 1998, 9:10a.m._

**Readings:** We will be reading material from a variety of sources. A copy of
all the readings (not including the online text described below) can be
purchased at Chedan Duplicating ([812 N.
Tyndall](http://geocities.vicinity.com/yt.hm?

FAM=geocities&CMD=GEO&SEC=geo&W=425&H=250&IC=5&AD2=812+N.

+Tyndall+Ave.&AD3=Tucson%2C+Az+85719)). One copy of the readings (including
the online text) will be placed on closed reserve at the main library.

Chapters will be required from an excellent online text called [ Basics of
Sleep Behavior on the sleep pages maintained by UCLA
](http://bisleep.medsch.ucla.edu/sleepsyllabus). If you do not have home
internet access, there are a number of computer stations on campus including
those at the main library. In addition, if you have a U.Arizona.edu email
account, you can access a text-only version of these pages by typing Lynx at
the main prompt and then typing g (for go) after which you will be asked for
the url address.

Readings in brackets [[ ]] are required for those registered for Psyc 578 and
recommended for those registered for Psyc 478.

For those who are interested in learning more about sleep research, you can
start by checking out our [UA sleep lab web
page:](http://w3.arizona.edu/~sleep) On this page, you will find a number of
links to other sleep web pages from around the world.

### Syllabus

#### Jan 15 Introduction

No reading assignment

#### Jan 20 Measurement of Sleep; Polysomnography

[Basics of Sleep Behavior, Part A: What Is
Sleep](http://bisleep.medsch.ucla.edu/sleepsyllabus/fr-a.html)

Bootzin, R.R., Manber, R., Perlis, M.L., Salvio, M.,  & Wyatt, J.K. (1993).
Sleep disorders. In P.B. Sutker & H.E. Adams (Eds.), Comprehensive Handbook of
Psychopathology, 2nd Edition. New York: Plenum Press. Assessment of sleep and
sleepiness (pp 535-538 only).

[[Carskadon, M.A., & Rechtschaffen, A. (1994). Monitoring and staging human
sleep. In M.H. Kryger, T. Roth, & W.C. Dement (Eds.), Principles and practice
of sleep medicine, 2nd edition, (pp 943-959). Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.]]

#### Jan 22 Phylogeny of Sleep

[ Basics of Sleep Behavior, Part B: The Phylogeny of
Sleep](http://bisleep.medsch.ucla.edu/sleepsyllabus/fr-b.html)

Allison, T., & van Twyver, H. (1970). The evolution of sleep. Natural History,
79, 56-65.

#### Jan 27 Ontogony of Sleep

Bootzin, et al. (1993) Sleep disorders. Developmental changes in sleep (pp
532-535 only).

[ Basics of Sleep Behavior, Part C: Developmental Course of Sleep
](http://bisleep.medsch.ucla.edu/sleepsyllabus/fr-c.html)

#### Jan 29 Circadian Rhythms

[ Basics of Sleep Behavior, Part G: Temporal Regulation of Sleep and
Wakefulness](http://bisleep.medsch.ucla.edu/sleepsyllabus/fr-g.html)

Webb, W.B. (1994). Sleep as a biological rhythm: A historical review. Sleep,
17, 188-194.

#### Feb 3 Ultradian, Circadian, Menstrual, and Seasonal Rhythms

Lavie, P., & Zvuluni, A. (1992). The 24-hour sleep propensity function:
Experimental bases for somnotypology, Psychophysiology, 29, 566-575.

Manber R., & Bootzin, R.R. (1997). Sleep and the menstrual cycle. Health
Psychology, 16, 209-214.

#### Feb 5 Disorders of the Sleep-Wake Schedule and Treatment

Bootzin, et al. (1993). Sleep disorders. Circadian rhythm disorders (538-540).

Lack, L., & Wright, H. (1993). The effect of evening bright light in delaying
the circadian rhythms and lengthening the sleep of early morning awakening
insomniacs. Sleep, 16, 436-443.

#### Feb 10 Physiology of NREM and REM Sleep

[ Basics of Sleep Behavior, Part D: NREM and REM Sleep
](http://bisleep.medsch.ucla.edu/sleepsyllabus/fr-d.html)

Aserinsky, E., & Kleitman, N. (1953). Regularly occurring periods of eye
motility, and concomitant phenomena, during sleep. Science, 118, 273-274.

#### Feb 12 Neurobiology of Sleep

[ Basics of Sleep Behavior, Part E: Brain Mechanisms of Sleep and Wakefulness
](http://bisleep.medsch.ucla.edu/sleepsyllabus/fr-e.html)

[ Basics of Sleep Behavior, Part F: Chemical and Neuronal Mechanisms of
Sleep](http://bisleep.medsch.ucla.edu/sleepsyllabus/fr-f.html)

#### Feb 17 Sleepiness, Sleep Deprivation, and the Functions of Sleep

[ Basics of Sleep Behavior, Part K: Daytime Sleepiness and Alertness
](http://bisleep.medsch.ucla.edu/sleepsyllabus/fr-k.html)

Harrison, Y., & Horne, J.A. (1995). Should we be taking more sleep? Sleep, 18,
901-907.

Bonnet, M.H., & Arand, D.L. (1995). We are chronically sleep deprived. Sleep,
18, 908-911.

[ Basics of Sleep Behavior, Part I: Functions of Sleep
](http://bisleep.medsch.ucla.edu/sleepsyllabus/fr-i.html)

#### Feb 19 Transition from Wake to Sleep

Ogilvie, R.D., Wilkinson, R.T., 7 Allison, S. (1989). The detection of sleep
onset: Behavioral, physiological, and subjective convergence. Sleep, 12,
458-474.

Campbell, K., Bell, I., and Bastien, C. (1992). Evoked potential measures of
information processing during natural sleep. In R.J. Broughton & R.D. Ogilvie
(Eds.), Sleep arousal and Performance. Birkhauser.

####  Feb 24 Mood, Cognitive Processing, and Sleep

Szarek, M.J., DiCenso, D.R., Bootzin, R.R., & Bell, I.R. (1997). The mood-
regulatory function of sleep: Night to morning changes in positive and
negative affect. Sleep Research, 26, 303.

[[Boivin, D.B., Czeisler, C.A., Dijk, D.J., et al. (1997). Complex interaction
of the sleep-wake cycle and circadian phase modulates mood in healthy
subjects. Archives of General Psychiatry, 54, 145-152.]]

Wyatt, J.K. & Bootzin, R.R. (1994). Cognitive processing and sleep:
Implications for enhancing job performance. Human Performance, 7, 119-139.

Dinges, D.F. (1990). Are you awake? Cognitive performance and reverie during
the hypnopompic state. In R.R. Bootzin, J.F. Kihlstrom, & D.L. Schacter
(Eds.), Sleep and cognition (pp 159-175). Washington, D.C.: APA.

####  Feb 26 Sleep and Memory

Wilson, M.A., & McNaugton, B.L. (1994). Reactivation of hippocampal ensemble
memories during sleep. Science, 265, 676-679.

Karni, A., Tanne, D., Rubenstein, B.S., Askenasy, J.J.M., & Sagi, D. (1994).
Dependence on REM sleep of overnight improvement of a perceptual skill.
Science, 265, 679-682.

Hobson, J.A., & Stickgold, R. (1995). Sleep the beloved teacher? Current
Biology, 5, 35-36.

####  Mar 3 Dreams, Lucid Dreams

[ Basics of Sleep Behavior, Part H: Dreams
](http://bisleep.medsch.ucla.edu/sleepsyllabus/fr-h.html)

Foulkes, D. (1996). Dream research: 1953-1993. Sleep, 19, 609-624.

[[Cartwright, R.D. (1990). A network model of dreams. In R.R. Bootzin, J.F.
Kihlstrom, & D.L. Schacter (Eds.), Sleep and cognition (179-189). Washington,
D.C.: APA.]]

LaBerge, S. (1990). Lucid dreaming: Psychophysiological studies of
consciousness during REM sleep. In R.R. Bootzin, J.F. Kihlstrom, & D.L.
Schacter (Eds.), Sleep and cognition (pp 127-135). Washington, D.C.: APA.

####  Mar 5 Review

####  Mar 10 Midterm

####  Mar 12 No class

####  SPRING BREAK

####  Mar 24 Nightmares, REM Behavior Disorder, Night Terrors, Violent
Somnabulism

Bootzin, et al. (1993). Sleep disorders. Arousal disorders (p 548) and
Parasomnias usually associated with REM (pp 549-550).

Wood, J.M., Bootzin, R.R., Rosenhan, D., Nolen-Hoeksema, S., & Jourden, F.
(1992). Effects of the 1989 San Francisco earthquake on frequency and content
of nightmares. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 101, 219-224.

Schenck, C.H. (1993). REM sleep behavior disorder. In M.A. Carskadon (Ed.),
Encyclopedia of sleep and dreaming (pp 499- 505). New York: Macmillan.

Broughton, R., Billings, R., Cartwright, R., Doucette, D., Edmeads, J.,
Edwardh, M., Ervin, F., Orchard, B., Hill, R., & Turrell, G. (1994). Homicidal
somnambulism: A case report. Sleep, 17, 253-264.

####  Mar 26 Sleep and Psychopathology

Bootzin, et al. (1993). Sleep disorders. Sleep disorders associated with
mental and neurological disorders (pp 551-554).

Rosenfeld, D.S., & Furman, Y. (1994). Pure sleep panic: Two case reports and a
review of the literature. Sleep, 17, 462- 465.

####  Mar 31 Insomnia

Bootzin, et al. (1993). Sleep disorders. Insomnia (pp 540-543) and Extrinsic
sleep disorders (pp 545-548).

Bonnet, M.H., & Arand, D.L. (1996). The consequences of a week of insomnia.
Sleep, 19, 453-461.

####  Apr 2 Cognitive-Behavioral Treatments of Insomnia (I)

Espie, C.A., Lindsay, W.R., Brooks, D.N., Hood, E.M., & Turvey, T. (1989). A
controlled comparative investigation of psychological treatments for chronic
sleep-onset insomnia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 27, 79-88.

[[Morin, C.M., Culbert, J.P., & Schwartz, S.M. (1994). Nonpharmacological
interventions for insomnia: A meta- analysis of treatment efficacy. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 151, 1172-1180.]]

####  Apr 7 Cognitive-Behavioral Treatments of Insomnia (II)

Manber, R., Bootzin, R.R., Acebo, C., & Carskadon, M.A. (1996). The effects of
regularizing sleep-wake schedules on daytime sleepiness. Sleep, 19, 432-441.

Dorsey, C.M., Lukas, S.E., Teicher, M.H., Harper, D., Winkelman, J.W.,
Cunningham, S.L., & Satlin, A. (1996). Effects of passive body heating on the
sleep of older female insomniacs. Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and
Neurology, 9, 83-90.

Oosterhuis, A., & Klip, E.C. (1997). The treatment of insomnia through mass
media, the results of a televised behavioural training programme. Social
Science and Medicine, 45, 1223-1229.

####  Apr 9 Cognitive-Behavioral Treatments of Insomnia (III)

Ansfield, M.E., Wegner, D.M., & Bowser, R. (1996). Ironic effects of sleep
urgency. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 34, 523-531.

Bootzin, R.R., Herman, C.P., & Nicassio, P. (1976). The power of suggestion:
Another examination of misattribution and insomnia. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 34, 673-679.

####  Apr 14 Pharmacological Treatments of Insomnia

[ Basics of Sleep Behavior, Part J: Clinical Pharmacology of Sleep
](http://bisleep.medsch.ucla.edu/sleepsyllabus/fr-j.html) Lamberg, L. (1997).
Sleep specialists weigh hypnotics, behavioral therapies for insomnia. Journal
of the American Medical Association, 278, 1647-1649.

[[Nicholson, A.N. (1994). Hypnotics: Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics.
In M.H. Kryger, T. Roth, & W.C. Dement (Eds.), Principles and practice of
sleep medicine, 2nd edition, (pp 355-363). Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.]]

#### Apr 16 Parasomnias and Treatment of Childrens Sleep Problems

Bootzin, et al. (1993). Sleep disorders. Infants, toddlers, preschool, and
early childhood (p 534), Sleep-wake transition disorders (p 549), Other
parasomnias (pp 550-551).

[ Basics of Sleep Behavior, Part L: Sleep and Other Medical and Psychiatric
Disorders ](http://bisleep.medsch.ucla.edu/sleepsyllabus/fr-l.html)

#### Apr 21 Narcolepsy

Bootzin, et al. (1993. Sleep disorders. Narcolepsy (p 543).

Rosenthal, L.D. (1993). Narcolepsy. In M.A. Carskadon (Ed.), Encyclopedia of
sleep and dreaming (pp 395-399). New York: Macmillan.

#### Apr 23 Sleep Apnea and Periodic Limb Movements

Bootzin, et al. (1993. Sleep disorders. Sleep Apnea, Periodic Limb Movements,
and Restless Legs (p 543-545).

Westbrook, P.R. (1993). Apnea. In M.A. Carskadon (Ed.), Encyclopedia of sleep
and dreaming (pp 45-50). New York: Macmillan.

#### Apr 28 Cognitive Consequences of Sleep Apnea

Bedard, M., Montplaisir, J., Malo, J., Richer, F., & Rouleau, I. (1993).
Persistent neuropsychological deficits and vigilance impairment in sleep apnea
syndrome after treatment with continuous positive airways pressure (CPAP).
Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 25, 330-341.

#### Apr 30 Sleep and Medical Illness

Bootzin, et al. (1993. Sleep disorders. Sleep disorders associated with
medical disorders (pp 554-555).

Bell, I.R., Bootzin, R.R., Ritenbaugh, C., Wyatt, J.K., DeGiovanni, G.,
Kulinovich, T., Anthony, J.L., Kuo, T.F., Rider, S.P., Peterson, J.M.,
Schwartz, G.E., & Johnson, K.A. (1996). A polysomnographic study of sleep
disturbance in community elderly with self-reported environmental chemical
odor intolerance. Biological Psychiatry, 40, 123-133.

#### May 5 Review

#### Tuesday, May 12 Final Exam, 2 - 4 PM

