_PSYC 768 Psychology of Scientific Visualizations_

George Mason University

Spring 1999, Tues 5:30 - 8:10 PM

Carroll Hall 311



**Instructors**

Dr. Christian Schunn \--- Carroll Hall 310 (Archlab) --- (703) 993-1744
[cschunn@gmu.edu](mailto:cschunn@gmu.edu) \--- www.hfac.gmu.edu/~schunn

Dr. Gregory Trafton --- Carroll Hall 309 (703) 993-1326

[gtrafton@osf1.gmu.edu](mailto:gtrafton@osf1.gmu.edu)

  

**Office hours** Tuesdays & Thursdays 3:00 --- 4:00, or by appointment



**Course Objectives**

The way we represent our environment has radical influences on how we think
and what we remember. Science is an especially interesting case of this
influence because scientists work with formal external representations (or
visualizations) and are constantly challenged to construct new visualizations
(either a new way of representing their data or a new way of representing
their theories).

This course brings together empirical and theoretical research from cognitive
psychology, human-computer interaction, and education to address the following
questions:

(1) What do people see (easily or at all) in different visualization formats?

(2) What are the properties of a good visualization (scientific or otherwise)?

(3) How do people understand different visualizations?

(4) How do people select among visualizations?

(5) How do people create new visualizations?

(6) How do people learn to use new visualizations?

There are two primary objectives of this course. This objective is quite
typical of this kind of course: to develop a deep understanding of the
psychological issues described above. With this objective in mind, we will be
reading and discussing primary research papers in the area. The second
objective is more practical: to develop new research questions that can form
the basis of a larger research project or dissertation (and to develop the
research skills that will be most useful in answering those questions). With
this objective in mind, there will be a strong hands-on component to the
course. Students will be collecting new data, which will form the basis of a
course project due at the end of the semester.



**Readings** (all are required)

Klahr, D., & Dunbar, K. (1988). Dual space search during scientific reasoning.
_Cognitive Science_ , _12_ , 1-48.

Schunn, C. D., & Klahr, D. (1996). The problem of problem spaces: When and how
to go beyond a 2-space model of scientific discovery. Paper presented at the
_18th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society_ , San Diego, CA.

Dunbar , K. (1997). How scientists think: Online creativity and conceptual
change in science. In T. B. Ward, S. M. Smith, & J. Vaid (Eds.), _Conceptual
structures and processes: Emergence, discovery, and change_. Washington, D.C.:
APA press.

Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a diagram is (sometimes) worth
10,000 words. _Cognitive Science_ , _4_ , 317-345.

Kaplan, C. A., & Simon, H. A. (1990). In search of insight. _Cognitive
Psychology_ , _22_ , 374-419.

Dee-Lucas, D., & Larkin, J. H. (1988). Attentional strategies for studying
scientific texts. Memory & Cognition, 16(5), 469-479.

Brodlie, K. W., Carpenter, L. A., Earnshaw, R. A., Gallop, J. R., Hubbold, R.
J., Mumford, A. M., Osland, C. D., & Quarendon, P. (1992). Scientific
visualization. New York: Springer-Verlag. (Chs 3 & 5)

Levy, E., Zacks, J., Tversky, B., & Schiano, D. (1996). Gratuitous graphics?
Putting preferences into perspective. Paper presented at CHI 96, Vancouver,
Canada.

Novick, L. R., Hurley, S. M., & Francis, M. (in press). Evidence for abstract,
schematic knowledge of three spatial diagram representations. Memory &
Cognition.

Gillan, D. J., Wickens, C. D., Hollands, J. G., & Carswell, C. M. (1998).
Guidelines for presenting quantitative data in HFES publications. Human
Factors, 40(1), 28-41.

Estes, W. K. (1997). On the communication of information by displays of
standard errors and confidence intervals. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 4(3),
330-341.

Schunn, C. D. (1998). Statistical signficance bars (SSB): A way to make graphs
more interpretable. Unpublished manuscript.

Tufte, E. R. (1997). Visual explanations. Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press. (pp.
20-23, 27-53)

Casner, S., & Larkin, J. H. (1989). Cognitive efficiency considerations for
good graphic design. Paper presented at the 11th Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society, Ann Arbor, MI.

Pinker, S. (1981). A theory of graph comprehension. In R. Freedle (Ed.),
Artificial intelligence and the future of testing (pp. 73-126). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.

Lohse, G. L. (1993). A cognitive model for understanding graphical perception.
Human Computer Interaction, 8, 353-388.

Tan, J. K. H., & Benbasat, I. (1990). Processing of graphical information: A
decomposition taxonomy to match data extraction tasks and graphical
representations. Information Systems Research, 1(4), 416-439.

Zacks, J., & Tversky, B. (1997). Bars and lines: A study of graphic
communication. Paper presented at the 2nd AAAI workshop on Reasoning and
Diagrams, Cambridge, MA.

Shah, P., & Carpenter, P. A. (1995). Conceptual limitations in comprehending
line graphs. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 124, 43-61.

Lauer, T. W., & Post, G. V. (1989). Density in scatterplots and the estimation
of correlation. Behaviour and Information Technology, 8(3), 235-244.

Merwin, D. H., Vincow, M. A., & Wickens, C. D. (1994). Visual analysis of
scientific data: Comparison of 3d topographic, color, and gray scale displays
in a feature detection task. In Proceedings of the human factors and
ergonomics society 38th annual meeting (Vol. 1, p. 240-244).

Salzman, M., Dede, C., & Loftin, R. B. (1999). VR's frames of reference: A
visualization tool for mastering abstract multidimensional information. Paper
to be presented at CHI 1999.

Baker, M. P. & Wickens, C. D. (1998). Human factors in virtual environments
for the visual analysis of scientific data. Tech Report.

Kuo, E., Lanzagorta, M., Rosenberg, R., Julier, S., & Summers, J. (1998). VR
scientific visualization in the GROTTO. NRL Tech Report.

Lovett, M. C., & Schunn, C. D. (in press). Task representations, strategy
variability, and base-rate neglect. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General.

Kleinmuntz, D. N., & Schkade, D. A. (1993). Information displays and decision
processes. Psychological Science, 4(4), 221-227.

Tabachneck-Schijf, H. J. M., Leonardo, A. M., & Simon, H. A. (1997). CaMeRa: A
computational model of multiple representations. Cognitive Science, 21(3),
305-350.



**Examinations and Grading**

There will be no exams or midterms. Instead, the grades will be based on a few
very short papers, the final project, and participation, in various forms. The
details are given below

  | % of course grade  
---|---  
6 Short papers |  20% (total)  
Presentation of readings |  5%  
Project presentation |  15%  
Project paper |  35%  
Participation |  15%  
  
While data will be collected in pairs of students, all write-ups will be done
separately by each individual. Plagiarism and other forms of communal thought
in written products will be considered very, very bad.

The readings are divided into 3 weeks of background readings and 6 weeks of
advance topic readings. For each of the advance topic weeks, a short 2-page
paper will be due at the beginning of class. Each paper is to discuss the
relationship between the data set you have collected and the advanced topic
for that week. The functions of these papers are to 1) facilitate deeper,
contextualized discussion each week and 2) to generate ideas for the final
project.

Each student will be in charge of presenting and leading discussion for the
readings for one of the weeks. Since everyone will have done the readings in
advance, this will consist of outlining the more controversial points for that
general topic, and very briefly summarizing the main points of each reading
(~10 minutes per reading).

The last several weeks of class will consist of project presentations. Each
student will give a 25 minute presentation, and we will have a 20 minute
discussion of each project. The function of this presentation is to get
detailed feedback from the group on the project---therefore, fully completed
analyses are not required.

The project will be due on the last day of classes. All students must meet
with the instructors at least 2 weeks before their project presentations to OK
their project ideas.



****

**Course Outline**

Any schedule changes or changes in assignments will be announced in class in
advance. After an absence, students are responsible for contacting the
instructor to obtain accurate information.



Date |

Topic |

Readings |

Deadlines  
---|---|---|---  
  
Week 1

Jan 26  |

Introduction

  |



-

  |



Pick project data sources

  
  
Week 2

Feb 2  |

Background I

Scientific discovery

  |

Klahr & Dunbar 1988

Schunn & Klahr, 1996

Dunbar, 1997 |

Meet with data source

and arrange time to

collect data  
  
Week 3

Feb 9  |

Background II

Representation

  |

Larkin & Simon, 1987

Kaplan & Simon, 1990

Dee-Lucas & Larkin, 1988 |





  
  
Week 4

Feb 16  |

Background III

Scientific visualization

  |

Ch3, Ch5 of Brodlie et al



  |



Data collected by end of

this week  
  
Week 5

Feb 23  |

Advanced topic I

**Choice**

  |

Levy et al 1996 Novick et al

Gillan et al. 1998

Estes, 1997, Schunn, 1998 |



Paper 1 due

  
  
Week 6

Mar 2  |

Advanced topic II

**Design**

  |



Tufte, 1997

Casner & Larkin, 1989 |



Paper 2 due

  
  
Week 7

Mar 9  |

Advanced topic III

**Graph:**

**Theories & tasks** |

Pinker, 1981

Lohse, 1993

Tan & Benbasat, 1990 |



Paper 3 due

  
  
Week 8

Mar 16  |



Spring Break --- No Class

  |





  |





  
  
Week 9

Mar 23  |

Advanced topic IV

**Graphs:**

**Empirical** |

Zacks & Tversky, 1997

Shah & Carpenter, 1995

Lauer & Post, 1989 |



Paper 4 due

  
  
Week 10

Mar 30  |

Advanced topic V

**Virtual reality** |

Merwin et al, 1994

Salzman et al., Kuo et al

Baker & Wickens, 1998 |



Paper 5 due

  
  
Week 11

Apr 6  |

Advanced topic VI

**Use of information**

  |

Lovett & Schunn, in press

Kleinmuntz & Schkade

Tabachneck-Schijf et al. |



Paper 6 due

  
  
Week 12

Apr 13  |

Student presentations I



  |





  |





  
  
Week 13

Apr 20  |

Student presentations II



  |





  |





  
  
Week 14

Apr 27  |

Student presentations III



  |





  |





  
  
Week 15

May 4  |

Student presentations IV



  |





  |







