PSC 3210 - Course Syllabus ![](RAINBAR.GIF)

### Pharmaceutical Sciences 3210

#### Pharmaceutical Biotechnology - Course Syllabus

####  Winter, 1999 - 2 credit hours

![](RAINBAR.GIF)

**Course Schedule

UPDATED FEBRUARY 9, 1999 **

Class meets from 11:15 - 12:10 PM in room 717 Shapero Hall on the following
days.

**Date - - - Week Day - - - - Lecturer - - - - Topic**

1-12 - - Tuesday - - Dr. Richard Gibbs - - Nucleic Acid Metabolism

1-14 - - Thursday - - Dr. Richard Gibbs - - Nucleic Acid Metabolism

1-19 - - Tuesday - - Dr. Richard Gibbs - - Nucleic Acid Metabolism

1-21 - - Thursday - - Dr. Aloke Dutta - - Nucleic Acids

1-26 - - Tuesday - - Dr. Aloke Dutta - - Nucleic Acids

1-28 - - Thursday - - Dr. Aloke Dutta - - Nucleic Acids

2-2 - - Tuesday ![](COOL.GIF) Group Project/Review Session

2-4 - - Thursday ![](HOT.GIF)**EXAMINATION NO. 1**

2-9 - - Tuesday - - Dr. Richard Gibbs - - Antibody Structure and Function

2-11 - - Thursday - - Dr. Richard Gibbs - - Antibody Structure and Function

2-16 - - Tuesday - - Dr. Richard Gibbs - - Antibody Structure and Function

2-18 - - Thursday - - Dr. William Lindblad - - Tools of Biotechnology

2-23 - - Tuesday - - Dr. William Lindblad - - Tools of Biotechnology

2-25 - - Thursday - - Dr. William Lindblad - - Tools of Biotechnology

3-2 - - Tuesday - - Dr. William Lindblad - - Tools of Biotechnology

3-4 - - Thursday - - Dr. William Lindblad - - Diagnosis of Genetic Disorders

3-9 - - Tuesday ![](COOL.GIF) Group Project/Review Session

3-11 - - Thursday ![](HOT.GIF)**EXAMINATION No. 2**

3-23 - - Tuesday - - Dr. William Lindblad - - Diagnosis of Genetic Disorders

3-25 - - Thursday - - Dr. William Lindblad - - Gene Therapy - In Vivo

3-30 - - Tuesday - - Dr. William Lindblad - - Gene Therapy - Ex Vivo

4-1 - - Thursday - - Dr. Richard Gibbs - - Antisense RNA Therapeutic Agents

4-6 - - Tuesday - - Dr. Richard Gibbs - - Recombinant Protein Therapeutic
Agents

4-8 - - Thursday - - Dr. Richard Gibbs - - Recombinant Protein Therapeutic
Agents

4-13 - - Tuesday - - Dr. Richard Gibbs - - Recombinant Protein Therapeutic
Agents

4-15 - - Thursday - - Dr. Bhaskar Jasti - - Delivery of Recombin. Proteins  &
DNA

4-20 - - Tuesday - - Dr. Richard Gibbs - - Recombinant Proteins in Drug
Discovery

4-22 - - Thursday ![](COOL.GIF) Group Project/Review Session

![](HOT.GIF)**FINAL EXAMINATION**

![](RAINBAR.GIF)

**Course Coordinator:**

    ![](GREENBULLET.GIF) Dr. William Lindblad, Associate Professor of Pharmaceutical Sciences     721 Shapero Hall Phone: 7-0513     E-Mail: [wlindbl@wizard.pharm.wayne.edu](mailto:wlindbl@wizard.pharm.wayne.edu)     Office Hours: Monday and Wednesday 10:00 - 11:15 AM(Almost any other time)

**Course Faculty:**

     Dr. Aloke Dutta, Associate Professor, Dept. of Pharmaceutical Sciences     Dr. Richard A. Gibbs, Associate Professor, Dept. of Pharmaceutical Sciences     Dr. Bhaskar L. Jasti, Assistant Professor, Dept. of Pharmaceutical Sciences     Dr. William J. Lindblad, Associate Professor, Dept. of Pharmaceutical Sciences

**Textbook:**

![](GREENBULLET.GIF) "Basic Medical Biochemistry - A Clinical Approach" by
Marks, Marks and Smith, FirstEdition, 1996, Williams and Wilkins, Inc.,
Baltimore, MD.

**Suggested Textbooks:**

The following two books are excellent references for the material presented in
this course. Although they are not required you might consider aquiring them.
Both of these suggested textbooks are available in the LRC on the 6th floor.
In addition, there are copies in both the Schiffman and Science/Engineering
libraries.

**Molecular Biology of the Cell**      Alberts B, et al.     New York:Garland,
1989.

**Human Molecular Genetics**      Strachan T     New York:Wiley-Liss, 1996

**Learning Objectives**

This course presents a wide variety of information in the fields of
biochemistry, molecular biology, cell biology, biotechnology, and immunology.
However, the information is all central to understanding the rationale for the
development of new therapeutic agents based on an understanding of the
molecular modification of cellular metabolism. Specific learning objectives
for each lecture will be provided by each lecturer, however the general
learning opjectives are as follows.

\- Understand the biochemical pathways used by cells to synthesize, degrade,
and reutilize nucleic acids and their precursors.

\- Characterize the salient features of eukaryotic DNA and RNA synthesis
including the relevant enzymes and co-factors.

\- Describe the different funcational domains of antibodies, how they are
synthesized, and how these molecules may be used for therapeutic and
diagnostic applications.

\- Describe the basic experimental approaches that can be used to manipulate
DNA including its cloning and introduction into different types of cells.

\- Understand the basis for different forms of genetic diseases and potential
approaches to treat these disorders using recombinant DNA technologies.

\- Identify key concepts for the use of antisense RNA as a therapeutic
intervention.

\- Characterize the basic steps to produce a recombinant protein therapeutic
agent including its expression, purification, and delivery.

**Basis for Course Grade**

Individual course grades will be determined by the grades obtained on the
following examinations and group project. The first two examinations will only
cover the material within the specified part of the course, however the final
will be cumulative. In general, each exam may include multiple choice, fill-
in-the-blank, short answer, and essay questions. The number of each type of
question will vary for each exam. All members of a group will receive the same
grade for the submitted project. Therefore, it is important that all
individuals actively participate in the project. The percentages listed for
each activity represents the amount each test will contribute to the final
grade.

![](GREENBULLET.GIF) Examination 1 - 20%  
![](GREENBULLET.GIF)Examination 2 - 20%  
![](GREENBULLET.GIF)Final Examination (Cumulative) - 50%  
![](GREENBULLET.GIF)Group Project - 10%

Challenges to examination questions will only be accepted in writing. The
deadline for challenges will be established by the course coordinator and
announced after each examination. A properly formatted challenge should
include the complete question, correct response according to the examination
key, and a complete but concise explanation of why an alternate answer is
correct. A citation to the textbook or suitable reference will be required.
Citation to class notes will NOT be accepted. Each challenge must be submitted
on a separate piece of paper.

The following grading scale will be used.

A = 91 - 100%; A- = 90%

B+ = 89%; B = 81 - 99%; B- = 80%

C+ = 79%; C = 70 - 78%

D+ = 69%; D = 60 - 68%

E = _<_ 59%

If a student has a compelling **MEDICAL** justification to miss a scheduled
examination, **AND** if (s)he contacts the course coordinator (Dr. Lindblad)
**PRIOR** to the examination period, a re-examination will be scheduled. Any
**UNEXCUSED** absence from an examination will result in a grade of 0 for that
part of the overall grade.

**Academic Dishonesty Policy**

Academic dishonesty is defined in section 3.0 of the WSU Student Due Process
Policy as: "any activity which tends to compromise the academic integrity of
the institution or subverts the education process." Included in this
definition are cheating, fabrication, plagiarism, and getting another student
to take ones test. If the course coordinator determines that a student has
engaged in any prohibited conduct under this policy, then provisions of
section 10.1 will be implemented. Specifically, a grade of E will be entered
for the COURSE grade and additional actions may be taken to have the student
excluded from the college.

A copy of the WSU Student Due Process Policy is available for review by
students in the Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences departmental office;
Room 528, Shapero Hall.

![](RAINBAR.GIF)

Return to the [PSC 3110/3210 Homepage](main.html)

![](RAINBAR.GIF)

