
    25.  LENORA A. TIMM, University of California at Davis
    
    Program in Linguistics
    UC Davis
    Davis, CA 95616-8685
    916/752-4540/9933 (mess.)
    
    Linguistics 113
    Winter 1993
    
    LINGUISTICS 113:  Language, Gender & Society. (4 units)
    Quarter:  Winter 1993.  Lecture Hours:  3.  Discussion:  1.
    
    Course Goals:  The course examines the nature and function 
    of sex differences in communication on a cross-cultural basis. 
    The emphasis is on verbal (spoken and written) language, 
    but some attention is also paid to differences in nonverbal 
    communication. The contrasts between stereotypes about 
    how women and men communicate and the actually 
    occurring patterns are carefully examined.  The significance 
    of different communication patterns is considered in 
    connection with theoretical models drawn from 
    sociolinguistics, anthropology, and psychology.  Topics 
    covered include:
    
    Sex differences in linguistic forms (pronunciation, 
    vocabulary, syntax, etc.); conversational patterns; issues of 
    status and politeness; gender bias in language use; 
    developmental aspects of sex-differential language use; sex 
    differences in nonverbal  communication; case studies in 
    language use (i.e., sex-related differences in legal language; 
    in educational texts; in the mass media); and strategies for 
    changing sexist linguistic practices.
    
    Recommended Preparation:  Linguistics 1 or Anthropology 4.
    
    Course format:  Lectures and discussion; several videos & 
    films.
    
    Student Assignments:  One short paper (25%);  one term 
    paper (50%); final exam (25%)
    
    Textbooks:
    (1) Barrie Thorne, Cheris Kramarae, and Nancy Henley (eds.), 
       LANGUAGE, GENDER AND SOCIETY.  Rowley, MA:  Newbury 
       House, 2nd ed., l983. 
    (2) Jennifer Coates and Deborah Cameron (eds.), WOMEN IN 
       THEIR SPEECH COMMUNITIES:  NEW PERSPECTIVES ON 
       LANGUAGE AND SEX.  New York:  Longman, 1989. 
    (3) Joyce Penfield, ed., WOMEN AND LANGUAGE IN 
       TRANSITION.  Albany: New York State University Press, 
       1987.
    (4) LINGUISTICS 113 READER:  a collection of articles 
       available at  Navin's Copy Shop.
    
    Linguistics 113 
    Winter 1993
                         S Y L L A B U S
    
    LECTURE TOPICS AND REQUIRED READINGS
    
    Abbreviations Used:
         LGS    =  Language, Gender and Society, ed. by Barrie 
    Thorne, Cheris Kramarae & Nancy Henley.  Rowley, MA: 
    Newbury House, 1983.
    
         WLT  =  Women and Language in Transition, ed. by Joyce 
    Penfield.  Albany:  State University of New York Press, 1987.
    
         WTSC = Women in their Speech Communities.  New 
    Perspectives on Language and Sex, ed. by Jennifer Coates & 
    Deborah Cameron.  New York:  Longman, 1989.
    
         L113R  =  Linguistics 113 Reader (a collection of articles 
    and book chapters compiled from different sources)
    
    1.0.  THE STUDY OF SEX DIFFERENCES IN GENERAL AND 
    LANGUAGE AND SEX IN PARTICULAR
         a.  WTSC:  Ch. 1, Introduction; Ch. 2, "Some Problems in 
    the Sociolinguistic Explanation of Sex  Differences" (by D. 
    Cameron & J. Coates)
         b.  LGS:  pp. 7-24, "Language, Gender and Society: 
    Opening a Second Decade of Research" (by B. Thorne, C. 
    Kramarae, & N. Henley)
         c.  L113R:  "When 'Difference' is 'Dominance' :  A Critique 
    of the 'Anti-power-based' Cultural Approach to Sex 
    Differences" (by A. Uchida in Language in Society 21(4):547-
    568)
    
    2.0.  THE INTERPRETATION OF SEX DIFFERENCES IN 
    LINGUISTIC FORMS
         a.  L113:  "What has Gender Got to do with Sex?"  (by D. 
    Cameron in Language and Communication 5(1):19-27)
         b.  LGS:  pp. 69-88,  "Intonation in a Man's World" (by S. 
    McConnell-Ginet)
    
    3.0.  SEX DIFFERENCES IN THE SELECTION AND 
    FREQUENCY OF LINGUISTIC FORMS
    3.1.  Assumptions and Stereotypes; Speech Styles
         a.  L113R: "Proprietors of Language" (by C. Kramarae in S. 
    McConnell-Ginet, R. Borker & N. Furman,  eds., Woman and 
    Language in Literature and Society.  New York: Praeger, 
    1980, pp. 58-68)
         b.  L113R:  "Genderlect, Powerlect, and Politeness" (by N. 
    Hoar in L. A .M. Perry, L. H. Turner, & H.M. Sterk, eds., 
    Constructing and Reconstructing Gender.  Albany:  State 
    University of New York, 1992, pp. 127-136.)
    
    3.2.  Empirical Evidence
         a.  WTSC:  Ch. 7, "Lakoff in context:  The social and 
    linguistic functions of tag questions" (by D. Cameron, F. 
    McAlinden & K. O'Leary)
         b.  L113R:  "How Taboo are Taboo Words for Girls?" (by V. 
    De Klerk in Language in Society 21(2):  277-290)
         c.  L113R:  "Functions of you know in women's and men's 
    speech" (by J. Holmes in Language in Society 15(1):1-22)
    
    4.0.  STRATEGIES OF COMMUNICATION
    4.1.  The Politics of Conversation
         a.  LGS:   pp. 89-102, "Interaction: The Work Women Do" 
    (by P. Fishman).
         b.  LGS:   pp. 103-118, "Small Insults:  A Study of 
    Interruptions in Cross-Sex Conversations between 
    Unacquainted Persons" (by C. West and D. Zimmerman).
         c. WTSC:  Ch. 8, "Gossip Revisited..." (by J. Coates); Ch. 9, 
    "Talk Control..." (by J. Swann); Ch. 10, "Talking Shop..." (by N. 
    Woods).
    
    4.2.  Issues of Status, Politeness, Power and "Face"
         a. WTSC:  Ch. 3, "A Pragmatic Account of Women's Use of 
    Standard Speech" (by M. Deuchar)
         b.  LGS:  pp. 119-124, "Men, Inexpressiveness, and 
    Power" (by J. Sattel)
         c.  L113R:  "How and Why are Women More Polite:  Some 
    Evidence from a Mayan Community" (by P. Brown in S. 
    McConnell-Ginet, R. Borker & N. Furman, eds., Woman and 
    Language in Literature and Society.  New York: Praeger, 
    1980, pp. 111-136) 
         d.  L113R  "Teasing and Sexual Harassment:  Double-bind 
    Communication in the Workplace (by J. Alberts in L. A .M. 
    Perry, L. H. Turner, & H.M. Sterk, eds., Constructing and 
    Reconstructing Gender.  Albany:  State University of New 
    York, 1992, pp. 185-196)
    
    4.3.   Identity and Conservatism vs. Innovation
          a.  LGS:   pp. 54-68, "Linguistic Options and Choices for 
    Black Women in the Rural South" (by P. Nichols).
         b.  WLT:  pp. 159-166, "The role of American Indian 
    women in cultural continuity and transition" (by B. 
    Medecine).
         c. WLT:  pp. 167-179, "Language and female identity in 
    the Puerto Rican community" (by A. Zentella).
         d.  WTSC:  Ch. 5, "Differences of sex and sects..." (by B. 
    Thomas)
    
    5.0.  PSYCHO-SOCIAL CONSTRAINTS REFLECTED IN 
    LANGUAGE:  GENDER BIAS IN ENGLISH
    5.1.  The Generic Masculine and Other Male-as-Norm 
    Phenomena
          a.  LGS:  pp. 25-37, "Beyond the He/Man Approach:  The 
    Case for Nonsexist Language" (by W. Martyna).
          b.  LGS:   pp. 38-53, "Prescriptive Grammar and the 
    Pronoun Problem"  (by D. MacKay).
          c.  WLT:  pp. 28-36, "Linguistic description:  He/she, s/he, 
    he or she, he-she" (by B.L. Dubois and I. Crouch)
    
    5.2.  The Lexicon:  Words about Women and Men
          a.  L113R:  "From discourse to dictionary:  How sexist 
    meanings are authorized" (by P.A. Treichler in  F.W. Frank & 
    P.A. Treichler, eds., Language, Gender, and Professional 
    Writing.  Theoretical Approaches and Guidelines for 
    Nonsexist Usage.  New York:  Modern Language Assoc., 1989, 
    pp. 51-79)
         b.  L113R:  "The Semantic Derogation of Women" (by M. 
    Schulz in B. Thorne & N. Henley, eds., Language and Sex: 
    Difference and Dominance.  Rowley, MA:  Newbury House, 
    1975, pp. 64-73.).
         c.  L113R : "Sexism in English:  A 1990s Update" (by A. 
    Pace Nilsen in P. Escholz, A. Rosa & V. Clark, eds., Language 
    Awareness.  New York:  St. Martin's Press, 1990, pp. 277-
    287)
    
    5.3.  References to the Sexes
         a.  L113R: "Don't 'Dear' Me!" (by N. Wolfson & J. Manes in 
    S. McConnell-Ginet, R. Borker & N. Furman, eds., Women and 
    Language in Literature and Society.  New York: Praeger, 
    1980, pp.79-92.
         b.  WLT:  "Surnaming:  The struggle for personal identity" 
    (by J. Penfield).
    
    6.0.  THE ACQUISITION OF SEX DIFFERENTIAL LANGUAGE
         a.  LGS:   pp. 140-150, "Men's Speech to Young Children" 
    (by J. B. Gleason and E. Greif)
         b.  L113R:  "Directive-Response Speech Sequence in Girls' 
    and Boys' Task Activities" (by M. Goodwin in S. McConnell-
    Ginet, R. Borker & N. Furman, eds., Woman and Language in 
    Literature and Society.  New York: Praeger, 1980, pp. 157-163) 
         c.  L113R:  " 'Kings are Royaler than Queens':  Language 
    and Socialization" (by A. Shelton in Young Children 
    [January]:4-9)
    
    7.0.  SEX DIFFERENCES IN NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION
         a.  L113R:  "Silent sounds and secret messages "(by B. 
    Eakins & G. Eakins in B. Eakins & G .Eakins, Sex Differences in 
    Human Communication.  Palo Alto:  Houghton Mifflin Co., 
    pp.147-179)
    
    8.0.  CASE STUDIES IN LANGUAGE USE (VERBAL & 
    NONVERBAL)
    8.1.  Literature
         a.  LGS:   pp. 125-139, "Consciousness as Style:  Style as 
    Aesthetic ((by J. Penelope & S. Wolfe)
    
    8.2.  The Law
         a.  L113R:  "Sexism in the Language of Legislatures and 
    Courts" (by  H.  Bosmajian in  A.P. Nilsen, et al., eds., Sexism 
    and Language.  Urbana, IL:  National Council of Teachers of 
    English, 1977, pp. 77-106)
    
    8.3.  Education
         a.   L113R:  "Sexism in Children's Books and Elementary 
    Classroom Materials" (by A. Nilsen in  A.P. Nilsen, et al., eds., 
    Sexism and Language. Urbana, IL:  National Council of 
    Teachers of English, 1977, pp. 151-180)
         b.   L113R:  "Sex Role Stereotypes of Stepparents in 
    Children's Literature" (by P. Cooper in L.P. Stewart & S. Ting-
    Toomey, eds., Communication, Gender, and Sex Roles in 
    Diverse Interaction Contexts.  Norwood, NJ: ABLEX, 1987, pp. 
    61-82)
         c.   WLT:  pp. 87-53, "Guidelines against sexist language: 
    A case history" (by A.P. Nilsen)
    
    8.4.  The Media
         a.  L113R:  "A New 'Genderation' of Images to Women" 
    (by L. Lazier-Smith in P.J. Creedon, ed., Women in Mass 
    Communication:  Challenging Gender Values.  Newbury Park, 
    CA:  Sage, 1989, pp. 247-260)
         b.  L113R: "A Sociocultural Close-up:  Body Image in 
    Advertising" (by A. Gagnard in P.J. Creedon, ed., Women in 
    Mass Communication:  Challenging Gender Values.  Newbury 
    Park, CA:  Sage, 1989, pp. 261-262)
         c.  L113R:  "Discourse on Women's Bodies:  Advertising in 
    the 1920s" (by M. Hawkins & T. Nakayama) in L. A .M. Perry, 
    L. H. Turner, & H.M. Sterk, eds., Constructing and 
    Reconstructing Gender.  Albany:  State University of New 
    York, 1992, pp. 61-72)
    
    9.0.  STRATEGIES FOR SOCIAL AND LINGUISTIC CHANGE
         a.  WLT:   pp. 3-27, "The new species that seeks a new 
    language:  On sexism in language and language change" (by 
    N. Henley)
         b.  WLT:  pp. 65-72, "Resources for liberating the 
    curriculum" (by B. Withers).
    
    
                         Videos/Films Used in LIN 113
    
    
    Stale Roles & Tight Buns (1982).  O.A.S.I.S. ([Men] Organized 
    Against Sexism and Institutionalized Racism]
    
    Gender: The Enduring Paradox (c. 1990).  Smithsonian 
    World/PBS.
    
    Inequity in the Classroom (1991).  Concordia, Canada: 
    Concordia University.
    
    Still Killing Us Softly:  Advertising's Image of Women (1987). 
    J. Kilbourne,  Cambridge, MA.
    
    
    Linguistics 113
    Language, Gender and Society
    Winter 1993
    
    Professor:  Lenora A. Timm. 
    Office Hours:  Tues/Thurs., 12-1:30 or by appt.  My office is 
    in 903 Sproul.  The Linguistics Office is in 922 Sproul.
    Telephone:  752-4540/9933 (message)
    
    T.A.s:    Ulrike Cristofori & Helen Hadji
    
    
    TEXTBOOKS:
       (1) Barrie Thorne, Cheris Kramarae, and Nancy Henley 
    (eds.), LANGUAGE, GENDER AND SOCIETY.  Rowley, MA: 
    Newbury House, 2nd ed., l983.  [Abbreviated in the Syllabus 
    as LGS]
       (2) Jennifer Coates and Deborah Cameron (eds.), WOMEN IN 
    THEIR SPEECH COMMUNITIES:  NEW PERSPECTIVES ON 
    LANGUAGE AND SEX.   New York:  Longman, 1989. 
    [Abbreviated in the Syllabus as WTSC]
       (3) Joyce Penfield, ed., WOMEN AND LANGUAGE IN 
    TRANSITION.  Albany: New York State University Press, 
    1987. [Abbreviated in the Syllabus    as WLT]
       (4) LINGUISTICS 113 READER:  a collection of articles 
    available at Navin's Copy Shop   [Abbreviated in the 
    Syllabus as L113R]
    
    COURSE REQUIREMENTS:  This is a General Education Course 
    (Contemporary Societies).  There is, therefore, an emphasis 
    on the enhancement of writing skills. Specific requirements 
    include:
    (1) one short paper (5-7 pages), worth 25% of the course 
    grade
    (2) a longer research paper (12+ pages) due at the end of the 
    quarter, worth 50% of the course grade
    (3) a final examination, worth 25% of the course grade.
    
    More information on the nature of the writing assignments 
    will be provided early in the quarter.
    
                                       SCHEDULE
    
    Lecture Date      Associated Readings or Other Assignment
            (Numbers and letters refer to sections in the Syllabus.)
    JAN.  7        -----
            12        1.0.a.-c.
            14        2.0.a.-b.
            19 
            21        3.1.a.-b. 
            26        FILM
            28 
    FEB.  2        3.2.a.-c.
             4         4.1.a.-c.
             9         4.2.a.-d.
            11        4.3.a.-d.
            16        5.1.a.-c./Paper #1 Due (in class)
            18        5.2.a.-c.
            23        5.3.a.-c/
            25        6.0.a.-c./FILM
    MAR  2       7.0.a.
              4        8.1.a.
              9        8.2.a.
            11        8.3.a.-c.
            16        8.4. a.-c. & 9.0.a.-b./FILM
            22        FINAL EXAM (8-10 a.m.)
            24        Paper #2 Due (by 5 p.m. in 922 Sproul)
    
    
                  Topics for Paper #1
    
    1.  This topic requires that you watch some TV; specifically, 
    a show with a good amount of dialogue, such as a soap opera 
    or a talk show. Tape-record a minimum of one hour of talk 
    from one type of show or the other, and while watching it, 
    take notes on characteristics of the speakers in terms of 
    their sex, approximate age, approximate socioeconomic 
    status and educational level, as well as their relationship 
    with other characters if you're watching a soap opera 
    (friend, parent, child, lover, estranged spouse); or 
    participants if you are watching a talk (guest, host, famous 
    or not, relative age and authority of guest vs. host).  The 
    assignment involves listening to these dialogues and 
    documenting any sex-linked differences in two of the 
    following areas of language usage:
       1) intonational contours (sentence melodies).
       2) pronunciation differences (e.g., runnin' vs. running, 
    watchin' vs. watching; would'ja vs. would you; gonna vs. 
    going to, etc.).
       3) vocabulary differences (e.g., in choice of expletive such 
    as 'darn' vs. 'damn' or something stronger; choice of 
    adjectives such as 'neat/nice' vs. 'rad/awesome', etc.; also in 
    reference to the sexes--e.g., 'woman', 'girl', 'chick', 'lady'; 
    'man', 'boy', 'guy', 'dude', 'dudette', etc.).
       4) tag questions (divide tags into modal vs. facilitative, 
    following the model provided in Reading 3.2.a, and pay 
    attention to intonation on the tags).
       5) hedges & fillers ('you know', 'sort of', 'kinda', 'like', etc.)
    
    You will need to consider how any differences you find 
    correspond (if they do) with the particular conversational 
    pairs involved (i.e., wife-husband, daughter-mother, 
    daughter-father, lover-lover, son-mother, son-father; host-
    guest, guest-guest); and you may find it useful to comment 
    on particular traits of given characters or personalities.
    
    In writing up your findings, tie your discussion in as much 
    as possible with what we have so far covered in class 
    (lectures and/or reading) about stereotypes of female and 
    male speech  and also what is known from empirical studies 
    that have been carried out (see the readings in 2.0., 3.1., & 
    3.2.).
    
    It is important that you structure your paper in an organized 
    way, including:
    
    --a statement of purpose (what you hope to accomplish and
       why).
    --a brief discussion of the programs you chose to watch and 
       why these particular programs.
    --a compact presentation of your data, and possibly 
       examples of some exchanges among speakers that you 
       recorded.
    --a discussion of the data and their implications in 
       connection with the stereotypes and realities of 
       male/female communication differences.
    --a brief conclusion.
    
    Your paper should be typed double-spaced, well proof-read 
    and approximately 6-7 pages in length (it may be longer 
    if you wish).
    
    
    2.  Drawing on what you have so far learned about sex 
    differences in English, create three conversations (about1-
    1/2-2 pages each) between female-female, male-male, and 
    female-male conversational partners.  The speakers should 
    be matched for age, education, and socioeconomic status. 
    Construct the conversations around one (and only one) of the 
    following themes:
    
    --Does television influence people's behavior?
    --Finding employment after graduation
    --Life in the U.S in the year 2020
    
    Construct the conversations so that they sound reasonably 
    natural to you--that is, don't overdo the stereotyped 
    linguistic features associated with the female and male 
    speech registers (styles).  On the other hand, you should 
    incorporate those linguistic features that seem to be in 
    agreement with real usage (according to what has been 
    reported in lectures and/or the readings, and based also on 
    your own experience).
    
    Following the conversations, provide a discussion of the 
    similarities and contrasts in the three sets of conversations 
    that you have constructed, and indicate specific readings 
    and/or lecture materials that you have drawn on in creating 
    them--(see the Syllabus 3.1., 3.2, & 4.1.)
    
    Your paper should be typed double-spaced, well proof-read, 
    and approximately 6-7 pages in length (it may be longer 
    if you wish).
    
    3.  Carefully read and think about the xeroxed editorial by 
    columnist John Keasler found on the other side of this sheet. 
    Your assignment is to write a rebuttal to Keasler's attack on 
    the revised edition of Roget's Thesaurus that has attempted 
    to eliminate sexist linguistic usages.
    
    You should respond to each of his assertions, or complaints, 
    and you may do so with rhetorical vigor; but be sure to 
    document your statements or points of rebuttal with 
    references to research presented in lecture and/or readings 
    for this course.   The readings especially pertinent to this 
    assignment are found in Sections 5.1, 5.2, and 5.3 of the 
    Syllabus.
    
    Your paper should be 5-7 pages, typed and double-spaced. 
    Pay attention to your grammar, style, and spelling.
    
    Linguistics 113
    TERM PAPER (Paper #2) TOPIC SUGGESTIONS
    (Papers due on March 24, 1993)
    
    The topics that follow are suggestive rather than exhaustive. 
    In other words, if there is some other project which you 
    would like to undertake that falls within the rather 
    generous boundaries of the field we are studying, that will 
    probably be fine by me; just be sure to clear your idea with 
    your T.A. or with me first.
    
    Most of the topics I have included here involve data 
    collection and analysis.  Your paper should include both 
    some examples of the data and a discussion of your data-
    gathering techniques.  You may wish to include all of your 
    data as a kind of appendix to which the reader can be 
    referred (however, the appendix is not to be counted as part 
    of the 12 pages required; bibliography, on the other hand, 
    may be counted).  Your paper grade will depend greatly on 
    the quality of your analysis and interpretation of the data 
    and also on the coherence of its overall organization.
    
    1. a.  Differential Usage of Tag Questions.
    
         Collect data for at least a week from overheard 
    conversations and from radio and T.V. (especially talk 
    shows).  You should note down in a systematic way the 
    following factors in each situation:
         1) sex of speaker and addressee
         2) approximate ages of speaker and addressee
         3) social identity of speaker and addressee (e.g., mother-
    daughter, brother-sister, friend-friend, student-teacher, 
    newscaster-newscaster, host-guest, etc.)
         4) the actual sentence heard with its tag question (e.g., 'I 
    can go now, can't I?; 'You're a real wise-guy, aren't you?')
         5) the type of sentence melody on the tag (rising, falling, 
    or other).
         6) additional voice modulations (e.g., angry, supplicating, 
    sarcastic, etc.)
         7) the place where you heard the tag question (e.g., on 
    the sidewalk outside of the speaker's apartment, in a 
    linguistics class, on a TV talk show, etc.).
    
    Relate your findings to such research as exists on this topic 
    (see relevant articles listed in Part IV.B. of the Annotated 
    Bibliography in LGS, pp. 239-246 and in Part V.B. of the 
    L113 Bibliography)
    
    1.b..  Differential Usage of Rising Terminals on Sentences that 
    are Responses to Questions
    
    This research topic is related to Topic 1.a., and was 
    mentioned in class in connection with the claim that has 
    been made that women tend much more than men to 
    answer, in effect,  a question with a question--e.g. Q:  What is 
    your name?  A:  My name is Sara Strong (with the answer 
    ending in a rising terminal, suggesting a question).  Follow 
    the directions as for 1.a. through Item 3 and also Item 7). 
    Beyond that look for any factors in the context or the nature 
    of the interaction that might help you understand why this 
    type of intonational pattern is selected.  It would also be 
    very useful, if possible, to record instances of the same 
    speaker using falling intonation in some contexts, and then 
    to see which variables (if any) have changed across the 
    examples of rising vs. falling intonation in response to a 
    question. 
    
    Relate your findings to such research as exists on this topic 
    (see relevant articles listed in Part IV.B. of the Annotated 
    Bibliography in LGS, pp. 239-246 and in Part V.B. of the 
    L113 Bibliography)
    
    2.  Differential Usage of Direct/Indirect Imperatives
    
         You will need to consider all of the same variables as 
    given in #1, adapting them, of course, to the use of 
    imperatives.  In addition, you may find it useful to classify 
    the imperatives in the following way:
    
    DIRECT:  e.g., Shut up!, Go away!
    
    INDIRECT:  Will you go away?  Would you mind going away? 
    Won't you please go away?
    
    DIRECT + INDIRECT:  Go away, please! or  Go away, won't you 
    please?
    
    Relate your findings to the hypotheses and interpretations of 
    sex differences in politeness forms set forth in Penelope 
    Brown's article "How and Why are Women More Polite..." (in 
    your L113R set of readings; also look at relevant articles in 
    Part VII. of LIN 113 Bibliography).
    
    3.  Differences in Conversational Practices
    
    For this project you will need to tape-record and take careful 
    notes on what goes on during a conversation or informal 
    discussion among the members of a small group (4-6 people, 
    mixed sex).  You will need at least an hour's worth of 
    talk to get enough data for patterns to become evident; and 
    you must also get the consent of the people whom you 
    record.  Alternatively, you can collect data from TV talk 
    shows; such data are somewhat less than "normal", but they 
    usually are spontaneous and they are readily accessible.
    
    Questions that you will be trying to answer are:  who takes 
    more turns; who takes longer turns; who interrupts whom; 
    who is interrupted most often; who interrupts most; how is 
    sex related to turns and interruptions?
    
    The following information should be noted for each 
    participant in the conversation:
         1) sex and approximate age of speaker
         2) number of turns taken in a particular conversation
         3) average length of speaker's turns (in seconds or 
    minutes)
         4) number of interruptions made by each speaker
         5) number or times each speaker was interrupted
         6) reaction of the person interrupted (e.g., tried to regain 
    the floor, overrrode the interruption, lapsed into silence, etc.).
    
    Discuss your findings in light of the readings and lectures on 
    conversational dynamics (and see Part V of the Annotated 
    Bibliography of LGS, pp. 264-292 and Part VI of LIN 113 
    Bibliography).
    
    4.  Differences in Terms of Address
    
    Keep a journal for at least a week in which you record how 
    you were addressed by whom in what situations.  Note down 
    systematically the setting in which each term of address was 
    used (e.g., service stations, restaurant, a telephone call 
    received, doctor's office, etc.); the social identity of the 
    addressor (e.g., gas station attendant, waitress or waiter, 
    insurance salesperson, doctor or nurse); the sex and 
    approximate age of the addressor.
    
    What conclusions can you draw about others' perceptions of 
    you as a social persona on the basis of the terms of address 
    you receive.  Discuss in relation to readings in section 5.3. of 
    the syllabus; and look at articles in Part XI of LIN 113 
    Bibliography
    
    5.  Differences in the Use of the Third Person Pronoun
    
    Collect examples, in the sentences in which you hear them, of 
    the third person pronoun used to refer to a person whose 
    sex is unknown or irrevelant.  Jot them down in a notebook 
    as you hear them, noting also sex of speaker and of 
    addressee, approximate age and socioeconomic position of 
    the speaker.  Collect examples for two weeks.  You may pad 
    out your corpus of data with examples culled from written 
    sources as well.  Organize your data along the following lines 
    (from Ann Bodine [1975] "Androcentrism in Prescriptive 
    Grammar", Language in Society 4:129-146):
         1)  Either sex, distributive (e.g., Anyone can do it if ____ 
    tries)
         2)  Either  sex, disjunctive (e.g., A father or mother is 
    supposed to love ___child)
         3)  Sex unknown (e.g., Who didn't return _____ library 
    book on time?)
         4)  Sex concealed (e.g., A certain party told me that ___ 
    had forgotten)
    
    Which third person pronouns are used in each category and 
    with what relative frequencies? Be prepared to hear 
    'they/their/them' in addition to the singular pronouns 
    'she/her/her' and 'he/his/him'.
    
    Does usage vary with any of the social variables noted above 
    (sex of speaker, etc.). Discuss findings in relation to other 
    research on the generic masculine (Section 5.1. of syllabus and 
    additional references in Part II.D. of the Annotated 
    Bibliography of LGS, pp. 174-181 and in Part IX of LIN 113 
    Bibliography).
    
    6.  Differences in Nonverbal Communication: 
    Smiling/Frowning and Touching
    
    Observe same-sex and mixed-sex dyads of people interacting 
    and note differences between each pair in smiling/frowning 
    behavior and in touching.  Who, in terms of sex, age, social 
    identity, smiles/frowns more frequently at whom?  And who 
    touches whom and what is the nature of the touching 
    (handshaking, grasping the upper arm, tapping the back of 
    the other's hand or back, leaning on the other party, etc.). 
    Find a way of coding your observations so that you will be 
    able to give some quantitative statements about differences 
    in body language.  Relate findings to some of the literature 
    on nonverbal communication (see Part IX of the Annotated 
    Bibliography in LGS, pp. 327-331 and Part XIII of LIN 113 
    Bibliography).
    
    7.  Speech Role Models in Children's Books
    
    Compare several books written for children (perhaps in 
    different decades--e.g., the 1940's, the 1960s, and the 
    1980s) looking for differences in speaking portrayed by the 
    girls and boys in the dialogues--differences relating to 
    verbosity, content, topic, politeness, etc.  Look also for 
    differences in the adult speaking models--do they parallel 
    what you find for the children?  Relate your findings to 
    those reported by Nilsen (in section 8.3 of syllabus) and 
    relevant articles cited in Part XVI of LIN 113 Bibliography.
    
    8.  Adult Speech Patterns in Literature
    
    Contrast the dialogue of female and male characters in works 
    of fiction written by female and male authors who are of 
    about the same generation and nationality.  A sample of four 
    novels should suffice--two by female and two by male 
    writers of an equivalent genre (e.g., spy, science fiction, 
    romance, etc.).  Compare your findings with some of that 
    reported in the research on literary style (Part VI.B. of the 
    Annotated Bibliography in LGS pp. 300-304 and Part XIV of 
    LIN 113 Bibliography).
    
    
    Some Topics that Have Been Examined by LIN 113 Students 
    in Past Years
    
    Differences in language used to infants
    Sexism in popular music lyrics
    Sisters sing:  the lyrics of African American women singers
    The images of woman in popular music
    Gender in poetry
    Sleeping beauties and sinister stepmothers:  How fairy tales 
       affect childrens'  perceptions of gender in society
    The influences of Disney movies on children's perceptions of 
       gender in society
    Sex in Seuss:  An examination of gender bias in beginner 
       books
    'Girl' vs. 'guy':  an analysis of language usage
    The depiction of sex role (and language usage) in greeting 
       cards
    Inmates and classmates:  What men call women
    Gender and conversational practices:  A comparison of three 
       UCD discussion sections
    Eye contact:  The study of one form of nonverbal 
       comunication
    The dance floor as a laboratory:  A study of nonverbal 
       communication between the sexes
    Facial expression:  A part of our everyday lives
    Techniques of address in four American plays
    Women and terms of address in Russian
    Hey, nice game, dude!  Terms of address in sports
    The effects of clothing on terms of address
    Interruption patterns on television talk shows
    Power surge:  The masculine characteristics of female talk-
       show hosts
    Sex and gender exploitation in the advertising industry
    The portrayal of males and females in men's and women's 
       magazines
    The portrayal of women in the media
    Media, advertisements, and African American women in 
       white America
    Ferraro, woman candidate:  Her treatment by the press
    Sexism in sports coverage
    Sexism in TV commercials
    Sexism in the language of stand-up comedians
    Gender perception of American English words
    An analysis of female and male language use in describing 
       attractive people
    Beginning writers' conceptions of female/male speech styles. 
    Dr. Morgan, the Wizard, and Mary:  What are women worth 
       in the comics?
    Gendered stereotyped speech in fictional dialogue
    Sex differences and stereotypes in science fiction
    Confidence in a linguistic form
    Linguistic portrayal of gender identity as expressed in 
       nursery rhymes
    Innocent nursery rhymes?
    The portrayal of female and male characters in Saturday 
       morning cartoons
    Sociolinguistic analysis of the movie He said/She said
    A linguistic perspective on the musical My Fair Lady
    A sociolinguistic analysis of Fatal Attraction 
    Saturday Night Live:  A scciolinguistic analysis
    Sex stereotyping of animals
    The influence of culture on language:  A study of two Greek 
       societies
    The generic masculine:  Its use and perception by children
    A survey of fraternity word usage
    A survey of attitudes towards women retaining their birth 
       names
    What's in a name?
    Women's and men's joke-telling at UCD
    Assessment of sex role stereotypes with regard to 
       occupations by non-American students studying English: 
       A study of attitudes
    Adolescent sex-role perceptions:  A survey of Davis Senior 
       High School students
    The role of sexist language and stereotypes among teenagers
    An examination of speech habits in four Davis children 
    
    
                          OUTLINE OF BIBLIOGRAPHY
    
    I.    Textbooks and Anthologies  1
    II.   Overviews   2
    III.  Book Reviews  4
    IV.  Perceptions and Stereotypes about Sex Differences in 
    Speech  4
    V.  Studies of Sex Differences in Linguistic Forms
       A.  Pronunciation/Articulatory Differences  6
       B.  Grammatical and/or Syntactic Differences  6
       C.  Lexical Differences  6
       D.  Differences in the Use/Frequency of Expletives & 
            Graffitti  7
       E.  General Studies/Cross-Linguistic Studies.  8
    VI.  Sex Differences in Conversation and Small-Group 
           Interaction 9
    VII.  Issues of Status, Politeness, Power, and "Face"  12
    VIII.  Conservatism vs. Innovation in Language  13
    IX.  The Generic Masculine and other Male-as-Norm 
          Phenomena  14
    X.  Gender Bias in the Lexicon  15
    XI.  References to the Sexes  16
    XII.  Developmental Aspects of Sex Differences in Language 17
    XIII.  Sex Differences in Nonverbal Communication  19
    XIV.  Sex Differences/Sexism in Literature  21
    XV.  Sexism in the Law and Courts  23
    XVI.  Sexism in Education  23
    XVII.  Language Usage in the Mass Media  24
    XVIII.  Language and Feminism  25
    XIX.  Changing Sexist Language  26
    
    
    BIBLIOGRAPHY
    
    I.  Textbooks and Anthologies
    
    Berryman, Cynthia L. & Virginia A. Eman, eds. (1980). 
       Communication, Language, and Sex:  Proceedings of the 
       First Annual Conference.  Rowley, Mass.:  Newbury House.
    Bosmajian, Haig, A. (1974).  The Language of Oppression. 
       Washington, D.C.:  Public Affairs Press.
    Brouwer, D. & Dorian de Haan, eds., (1987).  Women's 
       Language, Socialisation and Self-Image.  Dordrecht:  Foris.
    Caldie, Roberta W. (1981).  Dominance and Language:  A New 
       Perspective in Sexism.  Washington, D.C.:  University Press.
    Cameron, Deborah (1985).  Feminism and Linguistic Theory. 
       London:  Macmillan Press.
    ______, ed. (1990).  The Feminist Critique of Language.  A 
       Reader.  New York: Routledge.
    Coates, Jennifer (1986).  Women, Men, and Language:  A 
       Sociolinguistic Account of Sex  New York:  Longman.
    _____ & Deborah Cameron, eds. (1989).  Women in their 
       Speech Communities.  New Perspectives on Language and 
       Sex.  New York:  Longman.
    Dubois, Betty Lou & Isabel Crouch, eds. (1976).  The 
       Sociology of the Languages of  American Women.  San 
       Antonio, TX:  Trinity University.
    Eakins, Barbara W. & R. Gene Eakins (1978).  Sex Differences 
       in Human Communication. Palo Alto, CA :  Houghton 
       Mifflin.
    Frank, Francine & Frank Anshen (1983).  Language and the 
       Sexes.  Albany: State University of New York Press.
    Frank, Francine W. & Paula A. Teichler, et al. (1989). 
       Language, Gender, and  Professional Writing:  Theoretical 
       Approaches and Guidelines for Nonsexist Usage.  New York: 
       The Modern Language Association of America.
    Graddol, David & Joan Swann (1989).  Gender Voices.  New 
       York:  Basil Blackwell.
    Hill, Alette Olin (1986).  Mother Tongue, Father Time.  A 
       Decade of Linguistic Revolt.  Bloomington:  Indiana 
       University Press.
    Kramarae, Cheris (1980).  Women and Men Speaking. 
       Rowley, MA:  Newbury House.
    _____, ed. (1980).  "The Voices and Words of Women and 
       Men."  Special issue of  the Women's Studies International 
       Quarterly 3(2/3).
    Key, Mary Ritchie (1975).  Male/Female Language. 
       Metuchen, NJ:  The Scarecrow  Press.
    Lont, Cynthia M., & Sheryl Friedly, eds. (1989).  Beyond 
       Boundaries:  Sex and Gender Diversity in Communication. 
       Fairfax, VA:  George MasonUniversity.
    Miller, Barbara D. (1992).  Sex and gender hierarchies.  New 
       York:  Cambridge Univ. Press.
    Miller, Casey & Kate Swift (1977).  Words and Women.  New 
       York:  Anchor  Press/Doubleday.
    McConnell-Ginet, Sally, Ruth Borker & Nelly Furman, eds. 
       (1980).  Women and Language in Literature and Society. 
       New York:  Praeger.
    Nadler, L.B., Nadler, M.K. & W.R. Todd-Mancillas, eds. (1987). 
       Advances in Gender and Communication.  Lanham, MD: 
       University Press of America.
    Nilsen, Alleen Pace, Haig Bosmajian, H. Lee Gershuny & Julia 
       P. Stanley (1977).  Sexism and Language.  Urbana, Ill: 
       National Council of Teachers of English.
    Orasanu, Judith, Mariam K. Slater & Leonore Loeb Alder, eds. 
       (1979).  Language, Sex, and Gender:  Does "la difference" 
       make a difference?  New York Academy of Sciences , Vol. 
       327.
    Pearson, J.C. (1985).  Gender and Communication.  Dubuque, 
       IA:  W.C. Brown.
    Penelope, Julia (1990).  Speaking Freely.  Unlearning the Lies 
       of the Fathers' Tongues.   New York:  Pergamon Press.
    Penfield, Joyce, ed.  (1987).  Women and Language in 
       Transition.  Albany:  State  University of New York Press.
    Perry, Linda A.M., Turner, Lynn H. & Helen M. Sterk, eds. 
       (1992).  Constructing and Reconstructing Gender.  The 
       Links among Communication, Language, and Gender. 
       Albany:  State University of New York Press.
    Philips, Susan U., Steele, Susan & Christine Tanz, eds. (1987). 
       Language, Gender, and Sex in Comparative Perspective. 
       New York:  Cambridge University Press.
    Poynton, Cate (1989).  Language and Gender:  Making the 
       Difference.  Oxford:  Oxford University Press.
    Spender, Dale (1980).  Man Made Language.  London: 
       Routledge & Kegan Paul.Stewart, L.P. & S. Ting-Toomey, 
       eds. (1987).  Communication, Gender and Sex Roles in 
       Diverse Interaction Contexts.  Norwood NJ:  ABLEX.
    Thorne, Barrie & Nancy Henley, eds. (1975).  Language and 
       Sex:  Difference and Dominance.Rowley, Mass.:  Newbury 
       House.
    _____, Kramarae, Cheris & Nancy Henley, eds. (1983). 
       Language, Gender and Society.  Rowley, Mass.:  Newbury 
       House.
    Todd, Alexandra & Sue Fisher, eds. (1988).  Gender and 
       Discourse:  The Power of Talk.  Norwood, NJ:  ABLEX.
    Vetterling-Braggin, Mary, ed. (1981).  Sexist Language:  A 
       Modern Philosophical Analysis.  Totowa, NJ:  Littlefield, 
       Adams & Co.
    Wofson, Nessa &  Joan Manes (1985).  The Language of 
       Inequality.  Berlin: Mouton.
    Yaguello, Marina (1989).  Le sexe des mots.  Paris:  Belford.
    
    
    II.Overviews 
    
    Beatty, John (1979).  Sex, role, and sex role.  In Orasanu, 
       Slater & Alder, eds., Language, Sex, and Gender:  Does "la 
       difference" make a difference?  New York Academy of 
       Sciences Vol. 327:43-52.
    Bodine, Ann (1975).  Sex differentiation in language.  In 
       Thorne & Henley, eds.,  Language and Sex: Difference and 
       Dominance. Rowley, Mass.:  Newbury House, 130-149.
    Cameron, Deborah (1985).  What has gender got to do with 
       sex?  Language and Communication 5(1):19-27.
    _____ and Jennifer Coates (1985).  Some problems in the 
       sociolinguistic explanation of sex differences .  Language 
       and Communication 5(3):43-151.
    Conklin, Nancy Faires (1980).  The language of the majority: 
       Women and American English.  In Margaret A. Lourie & 
       Nancy F. Conklin, eds., A Pluralistic Nation:  The Language 
       Issue in the United States.  Rowley, Mass.:  Newbury House, 
       222-237.
    DeStafano, Johanna (1975).  Women's language:  By and 
       about.  In  Ordoubadian &  von Raffler-Engel eds., Views on 
       Language.  Murfreesboro, TN:  Inter-University Publishing, 
       66-76.
    Dundas, Todd & Sue Fischer, eds. (1988).  Gender and 
       Discourse:   The Power of Talk.  Norwood, NJ:  Ablex.
    Eubanks, Sheryle, B. (1975).  Sex-based language differences: 
       A cultural reflection.  In Ordoubadian & von Raffler-Engel 
       eds., Views on Language.  Murfreesboro, TN:  Inter-
       University Publishing, 109-120.
    Foss, Karen A. & Sonja K. Foss (1983).  The status of research 
       on women and communication.  Communication Quarterly 
       31(3):195-204.
    Frank, Francine W. (1978).  Women's language in America. 
       In D. Burtturff & E.L. Epstein eds., Women's Language and 
       Style.  Akron, OH:  L&S; Books, 47-61.
    Fried, Barbara (1979).  Boys will be boys will be boys:  The 
       language of sex and gender.  In Ruth Hubbard, Barbara 
       Henifine, & Barbara Fried, eds., Women Look at Biology 
       Looking at Women.  Cambridge, Mass.:  Schenchman, 
       37-59.
    Furman, Nelly (1978).  The study of women and language: 
       Comment.  Signs 4:182-185.
    Goldsmith, Andrea E. (1980).  Notes on the tyranny of 
       language usage.  In Kramarae, ed., "The Voices and Words 
       of Women and Men."  Special issue of  the Women's 
       Studies International Quarterly 3(2/3):179-192.
    Gregersen, Edgar (1979).  Sexual linguistics.  In J. Orasanu, M. 
       Slater & L. Alder, eds., Language, Sex, and Gender:  Does "la 
       diffrence" Make a Difference?  New York Academy of 
       Sciences Vol. 327:3-22.
    Haugen, Einar (1977).  "Sexism" and the Norwegian language. 
       In Paul Hopper (ed.), Studies in Descriptive and Historical 
       Linguistics:  Festschrift for Winfred P.Lehmann. 
       Amsterdam:  Benjamins, 83-94.
    Henley, Nancy & Barrie Thorne (1977).  Womanspeak and 
       manspeak:  Sex differences and sexism in communication, 
       verbal and nonverbal.  In Alice Sargen, ed., Beyond Sex 
       roles.  St. Paul, Minn.:  West Publishing Co.
    Holmes, Janet (1992).  Language and gender:  A State-of-the-
       Art Survey Article.  Language Teaching 24(4).
    Jenkins, Mercilee M. & Cheris Kramarae (1981).  A thief in 
       the house:  Woman and language.  In Dale Spender, ed., 
       Men's Studies Modified:  The Impact of Feminism on the 
       Academic Disciplines.  Elmsford, NY:  Pergamon Press.
    Johnson, L. Fern (1983).  Political and pedagogical 
       implicaions of attitudes towards women's language. 
       Communication Quarterly 31(2):133-138.
    Key, Mary Ritchie (1972).  Linguistic behavior of male and 
       female.  Linguistics 88:15-31.
    Kramarae, Cheris (1975).  Women's speech:  Separate but 
       unequal?  In B. Thorne & N. Henley, eds., Language and 
       Sex:  Difference and Dominance. Rowley, Mass.:  Newbury 
       House, 43-54.
    _____ Barrie Thorne & Nancy Henley (1978).  Perspectives 
       on language and communication.  Signs 3(3):638-651.
    Kramarae, Cheris (1980).  Proprieters of language.  In S. 
       McConnell-Ginet, R. Border, & N. Furman, eds., Women and 
       Language in Literature and Society.  New York:  Praeger, 
       58-68.
    _____ (1989).  Feminist theories of communication.  In E. 
       Barnouw, ed., International Encyclopedia of 
       Communications.  New York:  Oxford Univ. Press, 157-160.
    Lakoff, Robin (1973). Language and woman's place. 
       Language in Society 2(1):45-80.
    _____ (1975).  Language and Woman's Place.  San Francisco: 
       Harper & Row.
    McConnell-Ginet, Sally (1984).  The origins of sexist language 
       in discourse.  Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 
       433:123-135.
    Nilsen, Alleen Pace (1977).  Linguistic sexism as a social 
       issue.  In Nilsen, Bosmajian, Gershuny & Stanley, eds., 
       Sexism and Language.  Urbana, Ill:  National Council of 
       Teachers of English, 1-26.
    Philips, Susan U. (1980).  Sex differences and language. 
       Annual Review of Anthropology  9:523-544.
    Pop, Sever (1952).  Le langage des femmes:  enquete 
       linguistique a l'echelle mondiale.  Orbis 1(1):10-86 and 
       Orbis 2(1953):7-34.
    Saint-Jacques, Bernard (1973).  Sex, dependency and 
       language.  La linguistique 9(1):89-96.
    Sherzer, Joel (1987).  A diversity of voices:  men's and 
       women's speech in ethnographic perspective.  In Philips, 
       Steele & Tanz, eds., Language, Gender, and Sex in 
       Comparative Perspective.  New York:  Cambridge 
       University Press, 95-120.
    Shibamoto, Janet S. (1982).  Contributions of sociolinguistics 
       to the language sciences:  Language and Sex.  Language 
       Sciences 4(2):115-153.
    Smith, Phillip M. (1980).  Sex markers in speech.  In K. R. 
       Scherer & H. Giles, eds., Social Markers in Speech. 
       Cambridge University Press, 109-246.
    Treichler, Paula A. & Francine Wattman Frank (1989). 
       Introduction:  Scholarship, feminism, and language change. 
       In P.A. Treichler & K.W. Frank, Language, Gender, and 
       Professional Writing.  Theoretical Approaches and 
       Guidelines for Nonsexist Usage.  New York:  Modern 
       Language Association, 1-32.
    Uchida, Aki (1992).  When 'difference' is 'dominance':  A 
       critique of the 'anti-power-based' cultural approach to sex 
       differences."  Language in Society 21(4):547-568.
    West, Candace and Don Zimmerman (1985).  Gender, 
       language and discourse.  In T.A. van Dijik, ed.,  Handbook 
       of Discourse Analysis.  London:  Academic Press, 103-124.
    
    
    III.  Book Reviews 
    
    Brown, Penelope (1976).  Women and politeness:  A new 
       perspective on language and society.  Review in 
       Anthropology 3(3):240-249.  [Review of Lakoff 1975]
    DeFrancisco, Victoria L. (1992).  Review of You Just Don't 
       Understand, by D. Tannen.  Language in Society 21(2):319-
       323.
    DeMott, Benjamin (1976).  Review of Words and Women by 
       C. Miller & K. Swift.  The New York Times Book Review 
       (July 4), p. 8, 12.
    Deuchar, Margaret (1987).  Feminism and linguistic theory. 
       Review of Language, Feminism and Linguistics, by Deborah 
       Cameron.  Language and Communication 7(1):77-90.
    Eastman, Carol (1978).  Review of Language and Sex: 
       Difference and Dominance, ed. by B. Thorne  N. Henley. 
       American Anthropologist 79(4):348-349.
    Henley, Nancy (1978).  Review of Words and Women. 
       Contemporary Psychology 23(3):186.
    Hill, Alette (1976).  Review of Words and Women.  Frontiers 
       1(3):113-115.
    Martyna, Wendy (1978).  Review of Language and Sex: 
       Difference and Dominance.  Signs 3(3):704.
    McConnell-Ginet, Sally (1975).  Our father tongue:  Essays in 
       linguistic politics.  Diacritics 5(4):44-50.  [Review of Lakoff 
       1975]
    _____ (1983).  Review of Language, Sex and Gender:  Does "la 
       Difference" Make a Difference?, ed. by J. Orasanu, M.K. 
       Slater & L. Loeb Adler and of Sexist Language:  A Modern 
       Philosophoical Analysis, ed. by M. Vetterling-Braggin. 
       Language 59(2):  888373-391.
    Mills,  Sara (1988).  Do men and women talk differently? 
       Review of Women, Men and Language by J. Coates. 
       Language & Communication 8(2):155-158.
    Rosaldo, Michelle (1977).  Review of  Language and Sex: 
       Difference and Dominance. Language in Society 6(1):110-
       113.
    Timm, Lenora (1976).  Review of Language and Woman's 
       Place by Robin Lakoff.  Lingua 39: 244-252.
    Troemel-Ploetz, Senta (1991).  Selling the apolitical.  Review 
       of You Just Don't Understand by D. Tannen.  Discourse & 
       Society 2:489-502.
    
    
    IV.  Perceptions and Stereotypes about Sex Differences in 
           Speech
    
    Ariel, Mira (1988).  Female and male stereotypes in Israeli 
       literature and media:  Evidence from introductory 
       patterns.  Language & Communication 8(1):43-68.
    Aronovitch, Charles D. (1976).  The voice of personality: 
       Stereotyped judgements and their relation to voice quality 
       and sex of speaker.  Journal of Social Psychology 99:207-
       220.
    Berryman, Cynthia L. (1980).  Attitudes toward male and 
       female sex-appropriate and sex inappropriate language. 
       In Berryman & Eman, eds., Communication, Language, and 
       Sex:  Proceedings of the First Annual Conference.  Rowley, 
       Mass.:  Newbury House, 195-216.
    Bliese, Nancy W. (1977).  Sex-role stereotyping of adjectives. 
       Bulletin:  Women's Studies in Communication 1(2):27-32.
    Bradley, P.H. (1981).  The folk-linguistics of women's speech: 
       An empirical examination."  Communication Monographs 
       48:73-90.
    Coleman, Ralph O. (1976).  A comparison of the contributions 
       of two voice quality characteristics to the perception of 
       maleness and femaleness in the voice.  Journal of Speech 
       and Hearing Research 19(1).
    Deaux, Kay & Mary Kite (1985).  Gender stereotypes:  Some 
       thoughts on the cognitive organization of gender-related 
       information.  Academic Psychology Bulletin 7:123-144.
    Eble, Connie (1975).  Girl talk:  a bicentennial perspective.  In 
       R. Ordoubadian & W. von Raffler-Engel, eds., Views on 
       Language.  Murfreesboro, IN:  Inter-University Publishing, 
       77-86.
    _____(1976).  If ladies weren't present, I'd tell you what I 
       really think.  In D.L. Shores & C. P. Hines, eds.,  Papers in 
       Language Variation:  Samlads Collection.University: 
       University of Alabama Press, 295-301.
    _____(1976).  Etiquette books as linguistic authority.   In P. 
       Reich, ed., The Second LACUS Forum, 1975.  Columbia, SC: 
       Hornbeam Press, 458-475.
    Elyan, Olwen, Philip Smith, Howard Giles & Richard Bourhis 
       (1978).  RP-accented femalespeech:  The voice of perceived 
       androgyny?  In P. Trudgill, ed., Sociolinguistic Patterns in 
       British English.  Baltimore:  University Park Press.
    Giles, Howard & Patricia Marsh (1979). Perceived 
       masculinity, androgyny and accented speech.  Language 
       Sciences 1(2):301-315.
    Haas, Adelaide (1979).  Male and female spoken language 
       types:  Stereotypes and evidence.  Psychological Bulletin 
       86(3):616-626.
    _____ and Mark A. Sherman (1982).  Reported topics of 
       conversation among same-sex adults. Communication 
       Quarterly 332-342.
    Henton, Caroline (1989).  Fact and fiction in the description 
       of female and male pitch.  Language and Communication 
       9(4)299-311.
    Jeffrey, Mildred (1976).  Language and sex stereotyping.  In 
       O. Clapp, ed., Responses to Sexism.  Urbana, Ill:  National 
       Council of Teachers of English.
    Kemper, Susan (1984).  When to speak like a lady.  Sex Roles 
       10(5-6):435-443.
    Klecka, C.O. & D.V. Heler (1977).  Sex-role stereotyping in 
       English usage.  Sex Roles 3(3):  257-263.
    Kramerae, Cheris (1977).  Perceptions of female and male 
       speech.  Language and Speech 20)2):151-161.
    _____ (1978).  Women's and men's ratings of their own and 
       ideal speech.  Communication Quarterly 26(2):1-12.
    Packer, Jaclyn (1986).  Sex differences in perception of 
       street harassment.  Women and Therapy 5:331-338.
    Philipsen, Gerry (1975).  Speaking 'like a man' in 
       Teamsterville:  Culture patterns in role enactment in an 
       urban neighbourhood.  Quarterly Journal of Speech 61:13- 
       22.
    Rakos, Lana F. (1991).  Gender on the Line:  Women, the 
       Telephone, and Community Life. Champaign, IL: 
       University of Illinois Press.
    Rasmussen, Jeffrey Lee & Barbara E. Moley (1986). 
       Impression formation as a function of the sex role 
       appropriateness of linguistic behavior.  Sex Roles 
       14(3/4):149-161.
    Rosenkrantz, P., et al. (1968).  Sex-role stereotypes and self-
       concepts in college students.  Journal of Consulting and 
       Clinical Psychology 32(3):287-295.
    Shibamoto, Janet S. (1987).  The womanly woman: 
       Manipulation of stereotypical and non-stereotypical 
       features of Japanese female speech.  In S.U. Philips, S. 
    Steele & C. Tanz, eds., Language, Gender & Sex in 
       Comparative Perspective.  New York:  Cambridge 
       University Press, 26-49.
    Shimanoff, Susan B. (1983).  The role of gender in linguistic 
       references to emotive states.  Communication Quarterly 
       31(3):174-179.
    Stivers, Camilla (1992).  'Look like a lady, act like a man': 
       The dilemma of leadership.  Chapter 4 of C. Stivers, Gender 
       Images in Public Administration.  Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
    Warshay, Diana W. (1972).  Sex differences in language style. 
       In C. Savilios-Rothschild, ed., Toward a Sociology of 
       Women.  Lexington, Mass.: Xerox College Publishing, 3-9.
    Williams, J.E., H. Giles & J.R. Edwards (1977).  Comparative 
       analyses of sex-trait stereotypes in the United States, 
       England, and Ireland.  In Y.H. Poortinga, ed.,  Basic 
       Problems  in Cross-Cultural Psychology.  Amsterdam: 
       Swets & Zeitlander.
    
    V.  Studies of Sex Differences in Linguistic Forms
    
    A.  Pronunciation/Articulatory Differences
    
    Austin, William M. (1965).  Some social aspects of 
       paralanguage.  Canadian Journal of Linguistics 11(1):31-39.
    Benjamin, Barbaranne J. (1986).  Dimensions of the older 
       female voice.  Language & Communication 6(1/2):35-46.
    Brend, Ruth (1975).  Male-female intonation patterns in 
       American English.  In B. Thorne & N. Henley , eds., 
       Language and Sex:  Difference and Dominance. Rowley, 
       Mass.:  Newbury House, 84-87.
    Edelsky, Carole (1979).  Question intonations and sex roles. 
       Language in Society 8(1):15-32.
    Emanuel, F. & A. Scarzini (1979).  Vocal register effects on 
       vowel spectral noise and roughness: Findings for adult 
       females.  Journal of Communication Disorders 12(3):263-
       272.
    Haas, Mary (1944).  Men's and women's speech in Koasati. 
       Language 20:142-149.
    Henton, Caroline G. & R.A.W. Bladon (1985).  Breathiness in 
       normal female speech:  Inefficiency versus desirability. 
       Language and Communication 5(3):221-227.
    Hu, Mingyang (1991).  Feminine accent in the Beijing 
       vernacular:  A sociolinguistic investigation.  Journal of the 
       Chinese Langauge Teachers Association 26(1):49-54.
    Kimball, Geoffrey (1987).  Men's and women's speech in 
       Koasati:  A reappraisal.  International Journal of American 
       Linguistics 53(1):30-38.
    Kroskrity, Paul (1983).  On male and female speech in the 
       Pueblo southwest.  International Journal of American 
       Linguistics 49(1):88-90.
    McConnell-Ginet, Sally (1978).  Intonation in a man's world. 
       Signs 3(3):541-559.
    Sachs, Jacqueline, Lieberman, Philip and Donna Erickson 
       (1973).  Anatomical and cultural determinants of male and 
       female speech.  In R.W. Shuy and R.W. Fasold, eds., 
       Language Attitudes:  Curent Trends and Prospects. 
       Washington, D.C.:  Georgetown University Press, 74-84.
    Taylor, Allan (1982).  'Male' and 'female' speech in Gros 
       Ventre.  Anthropological Linguistics 24(3):301-307.
    Trudgill, Peter (1975).   Sex, covert prestige, and linguistic 
       change in the urban English of Norwich.  In B. Thorne & N. 
       Henley , eds.,  Language and Sex:  Difference and 
       Dominance.  Rowley, Mass.:  Newbury House, 88-103.
    Tuomi, S.K. & J. Fischer (1979).  Characteristics of simulated 
       sexy voice.  Folia Phoniatrica 31: 242-249.
    Williams,  Lynn (1983).  The pronunciation of women:  Some 
       Spanish evidence.  Language & Communication 3(2):171-
       190.
    
    
    B.  Grammatical and/or Syntactic Differences
    
    Barron, Nancy (1971).  Sex-typed language:  The production 
       of grammatical cases.  Acta Sociologica 14(1-2):24-42.
    Cameron, Deborah, Fiona McAlinden & Kathy O'Leary (1989). 
       Lakoff in context:  The social and linguistic functions of  tag 
       questions.  In J. Coates & D. Cameron, eds., Women in their 
       Speech Communities.  New Perspectives on Language and 
       Sex.  New York:  Longman, 74-93.
    Conners, Kathleen (1971).  Studies in feminine agentives in 
       selected European languages.  Romance Philology 24: 573-
       598.
    Dubois, Betty Lou & Isabel Crouch (1975).  The question of 
       tag questions in women's speech:  They don't really use 
       more of them, do they?  Language in Society 4(3):289-294.
    Hill, Janet H. (1987).  Women's speech in modern Mexicano. 
       In  S. Philips, S. Steele, & C. Tanz, eds.  Language, Gender, 
       and Sex in Comparative Perspective.  New York: 
       Cambridge University Press, 121-160.
    Nissen, Uwe Kjr (1986).  Sex and gender specification in 
       Spanish.  Journal of Pragmatics 10(6):725-738.
    Ordoubadian, Reza (1979).  Sexism and language structure. 
       In W. Wlck & P. L. Garvin, eds., The Fifth LACUS Forum 
       1978.  Columbia, SC:  Hornbeam Press,  415-421.
    Windfield,  Helen R., Chandler, Margaret A. & Darryl L. 
       Bassett (1989).  Tag questions and  powerfulness: 
       Quantitative and qualitative analyses of a course of 
       psychotherapy.  Language in Society 18(1):77-86.
    
    
    C.  Lexical Differences
    
    Abu-Haidar, Farida (1989).  Are Iraqi women more 
       prestige conscious than men?  Sex differentiation in 
       Baghdadi Arabic.  Language in Society 18(4):471-481.
    Bakir, M. (1986).  Sex differences in the approximation to 
       standard Arabic:  A case study.  Anthropological 
       Linguistics 28(1):3-9.
    Brouwer, Dede, Marinel Gerritsen & Dorian de Haan (1979). 
       Speech differences between women and men:  On the 
       wrong track?  Language in Society 8(1):33-50.
    Cherry, Kittredge (1987).  Womansword: What Japanese 
       words say about women.  Tokyo:  Kodansha International.
    Edwards, A.D. (1976).  Social class and linguistic choice. 
       Sociology 10:101-110.
    Edwards, Viv (1989).  The speech of British Black women in 
       Dudley, West Midlands.  In J. Coates & D. Cameron, eds., 
       Women in their Speech Communities.  New Perspectives on 
       Language and Sex.  New York:  Longman, 33-50.
    Holmes, Janet (1986).  Functions of  'you know'  in women's 
       and men's speech.  Language in Society 15(1):1-22.
    ______ (1988).  Of course:  a pragmatic particle in New 
       Zealand women's and men's speech.  Australian Journal of 
       Linguistics.  8: 49-74.
    ______ (1988).  Sort of in New Zealand women's and men's 
       speech.  Studia Linguistica 42:2.
    ______ (1990).  Hedges and boosters in women's and men's 
       speech.  Language & Communication 10(3):185-206.
    Holmquist, J.C. (1985).  Social correlates of a linguistic 
       variable:  A study in a Spanish village.  Language in 
       Society 14(2):191-204.
    Mills, Jane (1989).  Womanwords.  New York:  Longman. [A 
       dictionary on the origin & development of over 300 words 
       used for and about women]
    Nowaczyk, Ronald H. (1982).  Sex-related differences in 
       colour lexicon.  Language and Speech 25(3):257-265.
    Sanders, J.S. & W.L. Robinson (1979).  Talking and not talking 
       about sex:  Male and female vocabularies.  Journal of 
       Communication 29(2):2-30.
    Singer, D., J. Avedon, R. Hering, A. McCann & C. Sacks (1977). 
       Sex differences in the vocabulary of college students.  The 
       Journal of Sex Research 13:267-273.
    Steckler, Nicole A. & William E. Cooper (1980).  Sex 
       differences in color naming of unisex apparel. 
       Anthropological Linguistics 22(9):373-381.
    Swacker, Marjorie (1975).  The sex of the speaker as a 
       sociolinguistic variable.  In B. Thorne & N. Henley, eds. , 
       Language and Sex:  Difference and Dominance.  Rowley, 
       Mass.:  Newbury House, 76-83.
    
    
    D.  Differences in the Use/Frequency of Expletives and Graffitti
    
    Arluke, Arnold, Kutakoff, Lanny, and Jack Levin (1987).  Are 
       the times changing?  An analysis of gender differences in 
       sexual graffiti.  Sex Roles 16(1/2):1-8.
    Bailey, Lee Ann & Lenora A. Timm (1976).  More on 
       women's--and men's--expletives.  Anthropological 
       Linguistics 18(9):438-449.
    Bruner, Edward M. & Jane Paige Kelso (1980).  Gender 
       differences in graffiti: A semiotic perspective.  Women's 
       Studies International Quarterly 3(2/3):239-252.
    Cole, Caroline M. (1991).  'Oh wise women of the stalls....' 
       Discourse & Society 2(4):401-411.
    Coyne, James C., Richard C. Sherman & Karen O'Brien (1978). 
       Expletives and woman's place.  Sex Roles 4:827-835.
    De Klerk,  Vivian (1990).  Slang:  A male domain?  Sex Roles 
       22(9/10):589-606.
    ______ (1991).  Expletives:  Men only?  Communications 
       Monographs 58:156-169.
    ______ (1992).    How taboo are taboo words for girls? 
       Language in Society 21(2):277-290.
    Fine, Marlene G. & Fern L. Johnston (1984).  Female and male 
       motives for using obscenity. Journal of Language and Social 
       Psychology 3(1):59-74.
    Hopper, Robert, Larry G. Coleman & John A. Daly (1980). 
       Expletives and androgyny.  Anthropological Linguistics 
       22(3):131-137.
    Hughes, Susan E. (1992).  Expletives of lower working-class 
       women.  Language in Society 21(2):  291-304.
    Jay, Timothy (1992).  Cursing in America.  Philadelphia: 
       John Benjamins.
    Oliver, M.M. & Joan Rubin (1975).  The use of expletives by 
       some American women.  Anthropological Linguistics 
       17(5):191-208.
    Rieber, Robert W., Carl Wiedemann & Jeanette d'Amato 
       (1979).  Obscenity:  Its frequency and context of usage as 
       compared in males, nonfeminist females, and feminist 
       females.  Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 
       8(3):201-223.
    Risch, Barbara (1987).  Women's derogatory terms for men: 
       That's right, "dirty" words.  Language in Society 16(3):353-
       358.
    Selnow, Gary W. (1985). Sex differences in uses and 
       perception of profanity.  Sex Roles 12(3/4):  303-312.
    Staley, Constance (1978).  Male-female use of expletives:  A 
       heck of a difference in expectations. Anthropological 
       Linguistics 29(8):367-380.
    Wilson, Eileen (1974).  Men's Language and Women's 
       Language:  Up against the Wall.  Unpublished M.A. thesis, 
       UC Davis.
    
    
    E.  General Studies/Cross-Linguistic Studies
    
    Bell, Amelia R. (1990).  Separate people:  Speaking of Creek 
       men and women.  American Anthropologist 92:332-345.
    Blakar, R.M. (1979).  How sex roles are represented, 
       reflected, and conserved in the Norwegian language.  In R. 
       Rommetveit & R.M. Blakar, eds.,  Studies of Language, 
       Thought, and Verbal Communication.  New York:  Academic 
       Press.
    Brouwer, Dd (1989).  Gender variation in Dutch:  A 
       sociolinguistic Study of Amsterdam Speech.  Dordrecht: 
       Foris.
    Crosby, Faye & Linda Nyquist (1977).  The female register: 
       An empirical study of Lakoff's hypotheses.  Language in 
       Society 6:313-322.
    DeStefano, Johanna S. (1979).  Sex differences in languages: 
       A cross-national perspective with emphasis on English. 
       Language Sciences 1(2):316-324.
    Dixon, Roland, B. & Alfred L. Kroeber (1903).  The native 
       languages of California. American Anthropologist 5(1):1-
       26.  [Sex differences are discussed on p. 15.]
    Flannery, Regina (1946).  Men's and women's speech in Gros 
       Ventre.  International Journal of American Linguistics 
       12:133-135.
    Furfey, P.H. (1944).  Men's and women's language.  American 
       Catholic Sociological Review 5:218-223.
    Grootaers, William A. (1952).  Quelques remarques 
       concernant la langage des femmes.  Orbis 1:82-83.
    _____(1952).  Differences entre langage masculin et feminin. 
       Orbis 1:84-85.
    Jabbra, Nancy W. (1980).  Sex roles and language in Lebanon. 
       Ethnology 19(4):459-474.
    Klans, Flora (1924).  Die Frauensprache bei den primitiven 
       Vlkern.  Imago 10:215; 296-313.
    Kramer, Cheris (1974).  Folk-linguistics:  Wishy-washy 
       mommy talk. Psychology Today 8(1):32-85.
    Lasch, Richard (1907).  Uber Sondersprachen und ihre 
       Entstehung:  I, Frauensprachen.Anthropologische 
       Gesellschaft in Vienna.  Mitteil 37:89-101.
    McMillan, Julie R., A. Clifton, Diane McGrath, & Wanda S. Gale 
       (1977).  Women's language:  Uncertainty or interpersonal 
       sensitivity and emotionality?  Sex Roles 3(6):545-559.
    Moore, Samule F., Shaffer, Leigh, Goodsell, Dorothy & Greg 
       Baringoldz (1983).  Gender or situationally determined 
       spoken language differences?  The case of the leadership 
       situation.  International Journal of Women's Studies 
       6(1):44-53.
    Parsons, Elsie Clews (1913).  The Old-Fashioned Woman: 
       Primitive Fantasies about Sex.  New York:  Putnam's Sons. 
       [Includes a chapter entitled "Sex Dialects".]
    Pottier, Bernard (1972).  Langage des hommes et langage des 
       femmes en cocama.  In Jacqueline M.C. Thomas & 
       Lucien Bernot, eds., Langues et Techniques, Nature et 
       Societe.  Paris:  Klincksieck.
    Saada, Lucienne (1970).  Le langage des femmes tunisiennes. 
       In David Cohen, ed., Melanges Marcel Cohen: Etudes de 
       linguistique, ethnographie et sciences connexes  offertes 
       par ses amis et ses eleves a l'occasion de son 
       80eme anniversaire.  The Hague:  Mouton, 320-235.
    Taylor, Allan (1982).  "Male" and "female" speech in Gros 
       Ventre.  Anthropological Linguistics 24(3):301-307.
    Thomas, Beth (1989).  Differences of sex and sects: 
       Linguistic variation and social networks in a Welsh mining 
       village.  In J. Coates & D. Cameron, eds., Women in their 
       Speech Communities.  New Perpectives on Language and 
       Sex.  New York:  Longman, 51-60.
    Troemel-Ploetz, Senta (1982).  Frauensprache:  Sprache  der 
       Vernderung.  Frankfurt:  Fischer Taschenbuch Verlag.
    
    
    VI.  Sex Differences in Conversation and Small-Group 
           Interaction
    
    Ainsworth-Vaughn, Nancy (1992).  Topic transitions in 
       physician-patient interviews:  Power, gender, and 
       discourse change.  Language in Society 21(3):409-426.
    Albrecht, Terrance & Ralph E. Cooley (1980).  Androgyny 
       and communication strategies for relational dominance: 
       An empirical analysis.  In D. Nimmo,ed., Communication 
       Yearbook 4.  New Brunswick, NJ:  Transaction 
       Books, 699-719.
    Aries, Elizabeth (1976).  Interaction patterns and themes of 
       males, females, and mixed groups.  Small Group Behavior 
       7(1):7-18.
    Beattie, Geoffrey W. (1981).  Interruption in conversational 
       interaction, and its relation to the sex and status of the 
       interactants.  Linguistics 19:15-35.
    Bernard, Jessie (1973).  Talk, conversation, listening and 
       silence.  In J. Bernard, The Sex Game.  Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
       Prentice-Hall.
    Bilous, Frances R. & Robert M. Krauss (1988).  Dominance and 
       accommodation in the conversational behaviours of same- 
       and mixed-gender dyads.  Language and Communication 
       8(3/4):  183-195.
    Brown, Penelope & Stephen Levinson (1978).  Universals in 
       language usage:  Politeness phenomena.  In E. Goody, ed., 
       Questions and Politeness.  London:  Cambridge University 
       Press, 256-289.
    Coates, Jennifer (1989).  Gossip revisited:  Language in all-
       female groups.  In J. Coates & D. Cameron, eds., Women in 
       their Speech Communities.  New Perspectives on Language 
       and Sex.  New York:  Longman,  94-122.
    Crawford, Mary & Roger Chaffin (1987).  Effects of gender 
       and topic on speech style.  Journal of Psycholinguistic 
       Research 16(1):83-89.
    Crosby, Faye, Paul Jose, & William Wong-McCarthy (1981). 
       Gender, androgyny, and conversational assertiveness.  In C. 
       Mayo & N.  Henley, eds.,  Gender and Nonverbal Behavior. 
       New York:  Springer-Verlag.
    Crow, Brian (1983).  Topic shifts in couples' conversations. 
       In R. T. Craig & K.  Tracy, eds., Conversational Coherence: 
       Form, Structure and Strategy.  Beverly Hills:  Sage.
    Deakins, Alice H., C. Osterink, & T. Hoey (1987).  Topics in 
       same sex and mixed sex conversations.  In L.B. Nadler, et 
       al. (eds.), Advances in Gender and Communication 
       Research.  Lanham, MD:  University Press of America, 
       89-107. 
    de Boer, Mieke (1987).  Sex differences in language: 
       Observations of dyadic conversations between members of 
       the same sex.  In D. Brouwer & D. de Haan (eds.), Women's 
       Language, Socialization  and Self-Image, pp. 148-163.
    Dindia, Kathryn (1987).  The effects of sex of subject and sex 
       of partner on interruptions.  Human Communication 
       Research 13(3):345-371.
    Drass, Kriss A. (1986).  The effect of gender identity on 
       conversation.  Social Psychology Quarterly 49(4):294-301.
    Eakins, Barabara & Gene Eakins (1976).  Verbal turn-taking 
       and exchanges in faculty dialogue.  In B.L. Dubois & I. 
       Crouch, eds., The Sociology of the Languages of American 
       Women.  San Antonio, TX:  Trinity University, 53-63.
    Edelsky, Carol (1981).  Who's got the floor?  Language in 
       Society 10(3)

