**             [Home](../index.htm)
[Syllabus](../Syllabus/index.htm)
[Dialectica](../Dialectia/index.htm)               [Materia](index.htm)
[Conexus](../Conexus/index.htm)**  
---  
  
**Why Did The Chicken Cross the Road?**  
---  
  
**WHY DID THE CHICKEN CROSS THE ROAD?**

Philosophical

Albert Camus: It doesn't matter; the chicken's actions have no meaning except
to him.

Aristotle: To actualize its potential.

Confucius Chicken who first look both way, lives to see another day.

Doug Hofstadter: To seek explication of the correspondence between appearance
and essence through the mapping of the external road-object onto the internal
road-concept.

Epictetus: To enjoy the great festival of life with other hens.

Epicurus: For fun.

Eric Hoffer: To free itself from the tyranny of freedom by becoming a member
of the flock.

Grandpa: In my day, we didn't ask why the chicken crossed the road. Someone
told us that the chicken had crossed the road, and that was good enough for
us.

Henry David Thoreau: To live deliberately ... and suck all the marrow out of
life.

David Hume: Out of custom and habit.

Immanuel Kant: The chicken, being an autonomous being, chose to cross the road
of his own free will.

Jacques Derrida: Any number of contending discourses may be discovered within
the act of the chicken crossing the road, and each interpretation is equally
valid as the authorial intent can never be discerned, because structuralism is
DEAD, DAMMIT, DEAD!

Jean-Paul Sartre: In order to act in good faith and be true to itself, the
chicken found it necessary to cross the road.

Karl Marx: It was a historical inevitability.

Lao-tzu: The chicken does not cross the road yet reaches the other side.

Ludwig Wittgenstein: The possibility of "crossing" was encoded into the
objects "chicken" and "road," and circumstances came into being which caused
the actualization of this potential occurrence.

MACHIAVELLI: The point is that the chicken crossed the road. Who cares why?
The end of crossing the road justifies whatever motive there was.

Machiavelli: So that its subjects will view it with admiration, as a chicken
which has the daring and courage to boldly cross the road, but also with fear,
for whom among them has the strength to contend with such a paragon of avian
virtue? In such a manner is the princely chicken's dominion maintained.

Murphy: The chicken will invariably cross the road at the worst possible time.

Nietzsche: Because if you gaze too long across the Road, the Road gazes also
across you.

Plato: For the greater good.

Pyrrho the Skeptic: What road?

Ralph Waldo Emerson: It didn't cross the road; it transcended it.

Socrates: The unexamined road is not worth crossing.

Whitehead: Clearly, having fallen victim to the fallacy of misplaced
concreteness.

Zeno of Elea: To prove it could never reach the other side.



* * *

Scientific

Albert Einstein: Whether the chicken crossed the road or the road crossed the
chicken depends upon your frame of reference.

Carl Sagan: There are literally billions and billions of reasons.

Darwin: Chickens, over great periods of time have been naturally selected in
such a way that they are now genetically predispositioned to cross roads.

Darwin: It was the logical next step after coming down from the trees.

Hippocrates: Because of an excess of pleghm in its pancreas.

Stephen Jay Gould: It is possible that there is a sociobiological explanation
for it, but we have been deluged in recent years with sociobiological stories
despite the fact that we have little direct evidence about the genetics of
behavior, and we do not know how to obtain it for the specific behaviors that
figure most prominently in sociobiological speculation.

Werner Heisenberg: We are not sure which side of the road the chicken was on,
but it was moving very fast.



* * *

Mythical

The Sphinx: You tell me.



* * *

Political

Bill Clinton: Did some one say Chicken McNuggets?

Bill Clinton: This administration will do everything within its power to
provide free access to ALL chickens on ALL our nations roads, at ANY cost.

Bill Clinton: Now I will admit that while governor of Arkansas, I saw a lot of
chickens. However, I do not know this chicken. This chicken is simply trying
to gain some attention in professing to have crossed this road. This
presidency will not be respond to, nor be affected by any of the lies that
this chicken concocts.

Bill Clinton: I never had sex with the chicken. I was never even alone with
the chicken.

Franklin Delano Roosevelt: The chicken had nothing to fear but fear itself.

George Gallop: Hen Party 42% Dare 18% Whim 12% Business 2% Undecided 26%

Hillary Clinton: That's MY chicken.

Hillary Rodham-Clinton: I don't recall a chicken crossing a road because
chicken-road-crossings were handled by Jr. Associates at the Rose Law Firm.

J. Edgar Hoover: He was a Rhode Island Red conspiring against the U. S. of A.

Janet Reno: We used a tank to punch a hole in the hen house to end the
standoff with the Flock Davidians.

Jimmy Carter: It had lust in its heart

John Sununu: The Air Force was only too happy to provide the transportation,
so quite understandably the chicken availed himself of the opportunity.

John F. Kennedy: Ask not what road this chicken crossed. Ask what road you can
cross for that chicken.

Joseph McCarthy: He was a Rhode Island Red conspiring against the land.

Joseph Stalin: I don't care. Catch it. Crack its eggs to make my omelette.

Mao Zedong: The shortest distance between two points is the road of least
resistance.

Newt Gingrich: I'll tell you as soon as I get this foot out of my mouth.

Oliver North: National Security was at stake.

Paula Jones: I don't know but I can describe distinguishing characteristics on
its pecker.

Richard Nixon: The chicken did not cross the road, I repeat, the chicken did
NOT cross the road.

Ronald Reagan: I forget.

Ross Perot: Now I'm glad you asked that question. Take a look at this graph,
you see? Here's some of our American chickens. Over here we got some of them
Japanese chickens. Now are you listening to me? It's just as plain as the nose
on my face.

Saddam Hussein: This was an unprovoked act of rebellion and we were quite
justified in dropping 50 tons of nerve gas on it.

Sonny Bono He crossed the road because he couldn't ski down the mountain,
babe.

Supreme Soviet: There has never been a chicken in this photograph.

Thomas de Torquemada: Give me ten minutes with the chicken and I'll find out.

Thomas E. Dewey: It was time for a change.

Thomas Jefferson: All chickens, having been created equal, have the
inalianable right of freedom to travel as they desire..



* * *

Religious

The Bible: And God came down from the heavens, and He said unto the chicken,
"Thou shalt cross the road." And the Chicken crossed the road, and there was
much rejoicing. YEAH! YEAH!

Buddha: If you ask this question, you deny your own chicken-nature.

Mohammed: It is not for the chicken to cross the road but for the road to come
to the chicken

Moses: And God came down from heaven, and he said unto the chicken, "Thou
shalt cross the road." and the chicken did cross the road, and there was much
rejoicing.

Pope: It was mimicking my Lord Hervey.

The Pope: That is only for God to know.



* * *

Psychological

B.F. Skinner: Because the external influences, which had pervaded its
sensorium from birth, had caused it to develop in such a fashion that it would
tend to cross roads, even while believing these actions to be of its own free
will.

Carl Jung: The confluence of events in the cultural gestalt necessitated that
individual chickens cross roads at this historical juncture, and therefore
synchronicitously brought such occurrences into being.

FREUD: The fact that you are at all concerned that the chicken crossed the
road reveals your underlying sexual insecurity.

Freud: An die andere Seite zu kommen.

Sigmund Freud: Cock Envy!

Sigmund Freud: The chicken obviously was female and obviously interpreted the
pole on which the crosswalk sign was mounted as a phallic symbol of which she
was envious, selbstverstaendlich.

Sigmund Freud: Sometimes a chicken is just a chicken and a road is just a
road.



* * *

Computers/Business

Andersen Consultant: Deregulation of the chicken's side of the road was
threatening its dominant market position. The chicken was faced with
significant challenges to create and develop the competencies required for the
newly competitive market. Andersen Consulting, in a partnering relationship
with the client, helped the chicken by rethinking its physical distribution
strategy and implementation processes. Using the Poultry Integration Model
(PIM) Andersen helped the chicken use its skills, methodologies, knowledge
capital and experiences to align the chicken's people, processes and
technology in support of its overall strategy within a Program Management
framework. Andersen Consulting convened a diverse cross-spectrum of road
analysts and best chickens along with Andersen consultants with deep skills in
the transportation industry to engage in a two-day itinerary of meetings in
order to leverage their personal knowledge capital, both tacit and explicit,
and to enable them to synergize with each other in order to achieve the
implicit goals of delivering and successfully architecting and implementing an
enterprise-wide value framework across the continuum of poultry cross-median
processes. The meeting was held in a park-like setting, enabling and creating
an impactful environment which was strategically based, industry-focused, and
built upon a consistent, clear, and unified market message and aligned with
the chicken's mission, vision, and core values. This was conducive towards the
creation of a total business integration solution. Andersen Consulting helped
the chicken change to become more successful.

Bill Gates: I have just released the new Chicken Office 780. Which will not
only cross roads but will also lay eggs and file your important documents.

BILL GATES: I have just released the new Chicken Office 2000, which will not
only cross roads, but will lay eggs, file your important documents, and
balance your checkbook.

Bill Gates: I have just released the new Chicken Office 2000, which will not
only cross roads, but it will lay eggs, file your important documents AND
balance your checkbook. Unfortunately, when it divides 3 by 2 it gets
1.4999999999.

The Chick-fil-A cows: We don't know, but someone should eat that chikin



* * *

Civil Rights

Louis Farrakhan: The road, you will see, represents the black man. The chicken
crossed the "black man" in order to trample him and keep him down.

Martin Luther King, Jr.: I envision a world where all chickens will be free to
cross roads without having their motives called into question.

Pat Buchanan: To steal a job from a decent, hard-working American.



* * *

Literary

Blake: To see heaven in a wild fowl.

Chaucer: So priketh hem nature in hir corages.

Chicken Little: The sky fell

Donne: It crosseth for thee.

Douglas Adams: Forty-two.

Emily Dickinson: Because it could not stop for death.

Ernest Hemingway: Ask me not why the chicken crosses. It crosses for thee.

Ernest Hemingway: To die. In the rain.

Dr. Seuss: Did the chicken cross the road? Did he cross it with a toad? Yes
the chicken crossed the road, but why it crossed, I've not been told!$B%_

(BD Donne: It crosseth for thee.

Dorothy Parker: Chicks that cross the road. Are never served cold.

e. e. cummings: chicken legs moving road car missed safety

Edgar Allan Poe: Quote the chicken, "Nevermore."

Eeyore: Doesn't matter. Probably will get run over anyway. Just like a
chicken. Fal-de-ral and merriment. I'm going to eat my thistles.

Elizabeth Barrett Browning: Why doth the chicken cross the road, let me count
the ways.

Ernest Hemingway: To die. In the rain.

Dr. Frankenstein: Because it's alive! Alive!

George Orwell: Because the government had fooled him into thinking that he was
crossing the road of his own free will, when he was really only serving its
interests.

The Godfather: I didn't want its mother to see it like that.

Hamlet: Because 'tis better to suffer in the mind the slings and arrows of
outrageous road maintenance than to take arms against a sea of oncoming
vehicles.

Hamlet: That is not the question.

Herman Melville: Aye, aye! and I'll chase the great White Chicken across the
road, and round the horn, and round the norway maelstrom, and round
perdition's flames before I give him up.

Hugh Hefner: To express her sexual freedom.

Ian Malcolm: A butterfly flaps its wings in Beijing, and a chicken crosses
Wall Street.

Keats: Philosophy will clip a chicken's wings.

Kafka: Hardly the most urgent enquiry to make of a low-grade insurance clerk
who woke up that morning as a hen.

Macbeth: To have turned back were as tedious as to go o'er.

Mark Twain: The news of its crossing has been greatly exaggerated.

Oscar Wilde: Why, indeed? One's social engagements whilst in town ought never
expose one to such barbarous inconvenience - although, perhaps, if one must
cross a road, one may do far worse than to cross it as the chicken in
question.

Othello: Jealousy.

Robert Frost: It was the road less traveled and that made all the difference.

Sappho: Due to the loveliness of the hen on the other side, more fair than all
of Hellas' fine armies.

Swift: It is, of course, inevitable that such a loathsome, filth-ridden and
degraded creature as Man should assume to question the actions of one in all
respects his superior.

Wordsworth: To wander lonely as a cloud.

William Shakespeare: (1) A chicken with any other name would cross the same.
(2): To cross or not to cross? That is the question.

Will Rogers, Jr.: I never saw a chicken I didn't like. If he wishes to cross,
it is his right to do so.



* * *

1\. The Poets

James K Baxter: When the chicken bought the farm the braken made it's bed. And
why not cross the road? the Magpies said.

William Blake:

Little chicken, who set thee free To wander here on Highway Three? "Oh, sir,
your question's very odd; He is called the Lamb of God."

Little chicken, crushed and bleeding, You did not see that auto speeding. "Oh,
sir, do not sit and brood: God just had a Tygerish mood."

Elizabeth Barrett Browning:

Why doth the chicken cross the road, let me count the ways.

Robert Burns:

Fair Fa Your Honest Sonsie Face Great Chieftain O' The Chicken Race The
blackened road 'ahind ye said Ye best run quick ere ye be deid!

e. e. cummings chicken legs moving road car missed safety

Emily Dickinson: (1) Because it could not stop for death.

(2) I've always preferred chickens to people, for they know, but do not tell.

T.S. Eliot: (1) To leave the place she knew for another place And to stay
there for a while And then to move onward to a third place.

(2) Do I dare to cross the road?

(3) Weialala leia. Wallala leialala.

(4) It's not that they cross, but that they cross like chickens.

Ralph Waldo Emerson: (1) It didn't cross the road; it transcended it.

(2) Because all life is an experiment and the more experiments you make, the
better.

(3) Whoso would be a chicken, must be a nonconformist.

(4) To be great is to be misunderstood. It embarked on a quest for truth in a
society that is in conspiracy against the manhood of everyone of its roosters.

Robert Frost: (1) I saw the chickens gently drifting from the trees, Fall had
stolen the last of their green The chilly breath of the first fall freeze Now
to wait for the buds of the chicken in spring

(2) To cross the road less traveled by.

(3) He was crossing into someone's yard whose woods he didn't know. He would
not see the chicken there, to watch his woods fill up with snow...

(4)Whose road this is I think I know, His house is in the village though; He
will not see me crossing here To watch his woods fill up with snow.

(5)I have promises to keep, and miles to go before I sleep.

(6) It was the road less traveled and that made all the difference.

John Gay: Let us takes to the road. Hark, I hear the sound of roosters.

Theodor Geisel (Dr. Seuss) :

(1) Did the chicken cross the road? Would a chicken take a toad? The chicken
took the load across the road with a toad.

(3)Would you, could you cross the street On your two small chicken feet?

I would not, could not cross the street On my two small chicken feet. Across
the road I will not scram Even though a fowl I am.

Would you cross it in Japan To flee Godzilla and Rodan

Not in Japan Godzilla and Rodan I would not, could not cross the street On my
two small chicken feet. Across the road I will not scram Even though a fowl I
am.

Would you cross the road and cluck And jump to avoid the speeding truck?

Not with a cluck to avoid a truck Not in Japan Godzilla and Rodan I would not,
could not cross the street On my two small chicken feet Across the road I will
not scram Even though a fowl I am.

Would you hop across the road As though you were a garden toad?

Not across the road as though a toad Not with a cluck to avoid a truck Not in
Japan Godzilla and Rodan I would not could not cross the street On my two
small chicken feet. Across the road I will not scram Even though a fowl I am.

Would you cross it in the night Lit by passing car headlight?

Not in the night With car headlight Not across the road As though a toad Not
with a cluck To avoid a truck Not in Japan Godzilla and Rodan I would not
could not cross the street On my two small chicken feet. Across the road I
will not scram Even though a fowl I am.

Please dear chicken give it a try For across the road you can not fly.

Alright! Alright! I'll give it a try For it is true, chickens can't fly. Hey!
It's not bad, infact it's neat! I truly love to cross the street. Across the
road I LOVE to scram. I cross the road, a fowl I am. (By Chris Cracknell)

(2) Did the chicken cross the road? Did he cross it with a toad? Yes, the
chicken crossed the road, But why it crossed, I've not been told.

(3) Please dear chicken give it a try For across the road you can not fly.

Alright! Alright! I'll give it a try For it is true, chickens can't fly. Hey!
It's not bad, in fact it's neat!

I truly love to cross the street. Across the road I LOVE to scram. I cross the
road, a fowl I am.

Mother Goose:

Mary had a little chick, its comb was white as snow. And everywhere that Mary
went, that chick was sure to go. It followed her to school one day, at least
that's what is told. So she became famous in her own way, As the chicken that
crossed the road.

Haiku:

Life's destination Chicken crosses asphalt stream Becomes other side

Lure of other side Chicken having crossed the road Must now cross again (By
Clynch Varnador)

The chicken, fowl bird, wing and feather aflutter made it 'cross the road. (By
David Bunch)

Chicken crossed the road because he said "I want to lay it on the line"

Sam Hunt: So the chicken crossed the road and also rode the cross Our nation's
boss the Southern Cross Now bears his PALTRY load.

John Keats: It was a thing of beauty and a joy forever.

Omar Khayam: The moving chicken fingers write, and having writ, move on.

Edward Lear:

(1) There was a chicken from Rome Who had a most beautiful comb You must cross
the road Is what he was told Otherwise, you will never get home.

(2) There was a chicken from Del Mar Who decided to travel quite far So she
became quite bold And ran across the road And jumped on top of a passing car.

(3) There was a young chicken of Niger, Who went across the road on a tiger,
They returned from the ride With the chicken inside And a smile on the face of
the tiger.

Henry Wadsworth Longfellow: To be bold. Deeds are better things than words.
Actions mightier than boastings.

John Milton: To justify the ways of God to men.

Dorothy Parker: (1)Travel, trouble, music, art A kiss, a frock, a rhyme The
chicken never said they fed its heart But still they pass its time . (2)
Chicks that cross the road. Are never served cold.

Alexander Pope: It was mimicking my Lord Hervey.

Ezra Pound: For Il Duce and Der Fuehrer.

Edwin Arlington Robinson: (1) And the chicken, one calm summer night, went
across the road and put a bullet through its head.

(2) The chicken, born too late, scratched its head with the tip of one wing;
called the road fate and kept on crossing.

Burma Shave: Why does a chicken Cross the street? She sees a guy She'd like to
meet Burma-Shave

Alfred, Lord Tennyson: (1) So that it could sail beyond the sunset.

(2) It is better to have crossed and lost than to never have crossed at all.

Dylan Thomas: To not go gentle into that good night.

Walt Whitman: (1) To cluck the song of itself.

(2) Because lilacs last in the dooryard bloom'd on the other side.

(3) It crosses as it does, that is enough.

William Wordsworth: (1) To have something to recollect in tranquility.

(2) To wander lonely as a cloud.

Virgil: Arms and the chicken I sing, who first from the side of the road. To
the other side driven by fate, came at last to the foot of the "don't walk"
sign...



* * *

4\. The Musicians

Paula Abdul: The chicken was lost in a dream and did not know which way to go.

Ace of Base: The chicken saw the sign.

Aerosmith: The chicken doesn't want to miss a thing.

The Band: To take a load off....

The Beatles: To be free as a bird!

Wolfgang van Beethoven: (1) What? Speak up.

(2) The chicken crossed the road because it was deaf and couldn't hear the
approaching truck.

Vicento Bellini: She was a sonnambulist and knew not what she did.

Irving Berlin: Anything she could do, I could do better.

Boyzone: No matter what, the chicken can't deny what it believes in.

Johnny Bravo: (1) Hey man, long time no see chicken's crossing.

(2) Oh mamma, I love them chicks screaming for me.

(3) What a jerk!

John Cage: If you don't know, why ask?

George M. Cohan: Just to ride a pony.

Celin Dion: The chicken is on its journey through eternity.

Bob Dylan: (1) How many roads must one chicken cross?

(2) How many roads must a chicken travel down, before they call him a man?

(3) She walks just like a chicken walks, yeah, she squawks just like a chicken
squawks, oh she hen-pecks just like a chicken pecks, but she crosses the road
like a little chick.

Gaetano Donizetti: She first saw the light in the camp of the brave
grenadiers.

Gloria Estival: He's a bad, bad, bad, bad boy.

Gloria Gaynor: It will survive.

George Gershwin: It aint necessarily so.

W. S. Gilbert: In all our woes that curse our race, there is a hen in the
case.

Gilbert and Sullivan: Be firm, be firm my pecker. Your evil stars ascendant.

Spice Girls: The chicken said that it would go across the road for the joy.

Oscar Hammerstein, Jr.: It was such a beautiful morning, such a beautiful day.

Robert Herrick: Cross ye the roads while ye may, Old Time is still a-flying.

Faith Hill: This chick is unstoppable.

Dr. Hook and the Medicine Show: (1) She didn't; she got stoned and she missed
it.

(2) To get her picture on the cover of the Rolling Stone

(3) To talk to Sylvia's mother.

Dean Husarik: (1) To get her old age pension! Get it? No! You will when you're
65.

(2) The chicken was stapled to Colonel Saunders.

Janet Jackson: The chicken saw a black cat and wasn't afraid to die on the
road.

Michael Jackson: Crossing is HiStory.

Al Jolson: (1) For Mammy. You aint seen nuthing yet.

(2) He'd walk a million miles, for one of your smiles. my Mammy.

Gene Kelly: It was singing in the rain.

The Kingston Trio: (1) The lions still roam the barranca And a hen there is
always alone . (2) For a Scotch and Soda.

John Lennon: (1) You may say the chicken is a dreamer, but it's not the only
one.

(2) I imagine that all the chickens will cross the road one day.

(3) Reality leaves a lot to the imagination, but crossing the road with your
eyes closed is easy.

Alan Jay Lerner: (1) Just to be on the street where she lived.

(2) I know how it feels to have wings on your heels and to fly down the street
in a trance. He flew down the street on the chance they'd meet and they met
not really by chance.

Bob Marley:Could the chicken be loved?

Don McLain: This will be the day that It dies!

Jim Morrison: To break on through to the other side, I am the chicken king

Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart: How delightful 'tis to wander, by the breath of
evening fann'd

Cole Porter: It was just one of those things. Just one of those avian flings.

Elvis Presley: You aint nothin' but a chicken, crossin' all the roads!

Giacomo Puccini: As through the roads, she wanders onward merrily.

Queen: One road, one vision.

Lou Reed: To take a walk on the wild side (From: Pal Tauszig)

Gioacchino Rossini: A litttle voice she heard.

Sash!: The crossing was done in a mysterious time.

Seneca: (1) Nobody crosses by accident. Crossing must be learned.

(2) After crossing the road there is the other side.

Vonda Shephard: The chicken questioned its soul tonight and it knew that it
could shine a light to find the way back home across the road.

John Phillip Sousa: He was marching to a different tune.

Frank Sinatra: (1) 'Cause the chick... is a tramp!

(2) He had to do it, his way

Sting & Aswad: There has to be an invisible sun on the other side that gives
its heat and hope to every chicken.

The Rolling Stones: To give sympathy to the Devil.

U2: (1) It was the sweetest thing.

(2) The chicken can't cross with or without you.

Richard Wagner: The unexplained, unpenetrated cause of all these woes, who
will to us disclose?

Vengaboys: The chicken would like to party from New York to San Francisco.

Giuseppe Verdi: (1) Ever free shall she still hasten madly on from pleasure to
pleasure

(2) La pollo mobile.

Tom Waits: ...and the chicken, decked out in Foster Grant wraparounds and
Purina checkerboard slacks, cruised across La Cienica Boulevard in a 1959
monkey-shit- brown Buick Super, while the yellow biscuit of a buttery cue-ball
moon came rolling maverick across an obsidian sky, and why? you say? Cause
that's life, and that's what all the chickens say. You're one one side in
April, and you're seriouly run down in May ....

Kurt Weill: Chicken's sneakin' round the corner, afraid of meeting Mack the
Knife.

John Williams: I'll have to thoroughly research the chicken's musical
background before I can compose a road-crossing theme.

Stevie Wonder: I'm glad I'm blind and couldn't see when it was hit by a truck.

[BACK TO CLASS OUTLINE](Outlines/VC3_Outline.htm)  
---

