![\[microfilm reel\]](http://libweb.uoregon.edu/govdocs/micro/reel2.gif) |
**Microcards with Library of Congress Call Numbers**  
  
Microforms Service Desk (Knight Library, First Floor): (541) 346-3080.
Microforms Coordinator: Tamara Vidos. **Reference questions
to:[micro@darkwing.uoregon.edu](mailto:micro@darkwing.uoregon.edu)**  
---|---  
  
This inventory lists Microcards held in the Microforms Collection under the
Library of Congress classification system. There is a reader but there is no
printer for this format at the UO Library. Where multiple cards have the same
call number, cards are arranged by author's last name.

> **AI3.** Bone, Esther J. The Readers guide to periodical literature: a
study. Thesis, Kent State, 1967.

>

> **B2430.** Pullan, Veronica Agnes. Simone Weil's criteria of the sources of
literary creativity. Thesis, Florida, 1958.

>

> **BF199.** Chaloupka, Larry James. Analysis of generality of specificity of
level of aspiration in selected psychomotor and cognitive tasks. Thesis,
Louisiana State, 1969.

>

> **BF199.** Chevrette, John Maurice. The effect of peer observation on
selected tests of physical performance. Thesis, Florida State, 1966.

>

> **BF199.** Ellis, Peggy D. The effect of knowledge of results and level of
aspiration on measures of strength and motor performance of junior high school
girls. Thesis, Wisconsin, 1962.

>

> **BF199.** Gorsuch, Harvey Ray. The competitive athlete and the achievement
motive as measured by a projective test. Thesis, Pennsylvania State, 1968.

>

> **BF199.** Johnson, Barry L. The effects of applying different motivational
techniques during training and in testing upon strength performance. Thesis,
Louisiana State, 1965.

>

> **BF199.** Lanzetta, John T. An investigation of group behavior under
stress. Thesis, Rochester, 1952.

>

> **BF199.** Nelson, Jack Kimberly. An analysis of the effects of applying
various motivational situations to college men subjected to a stressful
physical performance. Thesis, Oregon, 1962.

>

> **BF199.** Plummer, Peter J. A Q-sort study of the achievement motivation of
selected athletes. Thesis, Massachusetts, 1969.

>

> **BF199.** Stafford, Beverly Louise. The effects of age and sex on the level
of aspiration in selected motor tasks. Thesis, Louisiana State, 1969.

>

> **BF199.** Stebbins, Clay Benjamin. Achievement in sport as a function of
personality and social situation. Thesis, Wisconsin, 1969.

>

> **BF199.** Willis, Joe Don. Achievement motivation, success, and
competitiveness in college wrestling. Thesis, Ohio State, 1968

>

> **BF241.** Bailey, Beverly Joyce. The relationship of various degrees of
binocular vision to a specific test of depth perception. Thesis, Iowa, 1968.

>

> **BF241.** Cobb, Robert A. A comparative study of color recognition in the
peripheral field of vision of participants in selected sports. Thesis,
Springfield, 1967.

>

> **BF241.** Heimerer, Elsa M. A study of the relationship between visual
depth perception and general tennis ability. Thesis, North Carolina
Greensboro, 1968.

>

> **BF241.** Hoeffner, Balbina Thecla. The effects of alcohol upon vision.
Thesis, Illinois, 1969.

>

> **BF241.** Herrold, Judith Ann. An exploratory study of the role of
binocular vision in performance of dynamic movement in tennis skills. Thesis,
Ohio State, 1967.

>

> **BF241.** Hoepner, Barbara Jane. Comparison of motor ability, new motor
skill learning, and adjustment to a rearranged visual field. Thesis,
Pennsylvania State, 1965.

>

> **BF241.** Viguers, Doris Kimball. An investigation of the relationship of
tracking ability to skill in aerial games. Thesis, Smith, 1967.

>

> **BF241.** Williams, Harriet Grace. The effects of systematic variation of
speed and direction of object flight and of skill and age classifications upon
visuo-perceptual judgements of moving objects in three-dimensional space.
Thesis, Wisconsin, 1968.

>

> **BF241.** Zimmerman, M Nadine. The influence of stereoscopic depth
perception training and level of stereopsis upon accuracy in anticipating the
landing point of moving objects in three dimensional space. Thesis, Wisconsin,
1970.

>

> **BF275.** Day, Phyllis Miedema. Comparison of tactual and kinesthetic
feedback. Thesis, Illinois, 1965.

>

> **BF285.** Campbell, Ruthanne E. After-effects of satiation on selected
performance criteria of elbow flexion. Thesis, Pennsylvania State, 1968.

>

> **BF285.** Horton, Doris Ann. The effect of gravity, resistance and
knowledge of results on performance of kinesthetic arm positioning task.
Thesis, Iowa, 1965.

>

> **BF285.** Johnson, Judith Royce. Measurement of kinesthesis in space
orientation. Thesis, Iowa, 1968.

>

> **BF285.** Lyon, Muriel Joan. Th effect of practice on three dynamic
components of kinesthetic perception. Thesis, USC, 1966.

>

> **BF285.** Pehcar, Gary S. The immediate effects of altered resistance upon
selected speed variables of resisted elbow flexion. Thesis, Pennsylvania
State, 1968.

>

> **BF285.** Sisley, Becky Lynn. Kinesthesis in relation to skill level in
basketball, bowling and tennis. Thesis, North Carolina Women's College, 1963

>

> **BF285.** West, Elles Charles. An analysis of position sense in relation to
deranged quadriceps muscle and knee joint tissues. Thesis, Oregon, 1965.

>

> **BF291.** Carter, Frances Helen. Selected kinesthetic and psychological
differences between the highly skilled in dance and in sports. Thesis, Iowa,
1965.

>

> **BF291.** Cheney, M Kay. A comparison of three groups of skilled performers
on a battery of selected tests of balance. Thesis, Iowa, 1965.

>

> **BF291.** Cleary, Brian. A study to determine the relationship between
reading disabilities and balance. Thesis, Springfield, 1968.

>

> **BF291.** Cooke, Bryan Edward Marshall. The relationship between balance
and cognitive abilities of children aged eight to thirteen years. Thesis,
Illinois, 1968.

>

> **BF291.** McCurry, Frederick C. A comparison of dynamic balance
performances of deaf and normal college men. Thesis, Pennsylvania State, 1969.

>

> **BF291.** McQuiety, Mary. The effect of rotatory stimulation of the
labryinth on vertical writing. Thesis, Wisconsin, 1967.

>

> **BF291.** Nolen, Carlyle A. A study of the relationship between balance on
stationary and moving objects. Thesis, North Texas State, 1968.

>

> **BF291.** Roy, Roch. The effects of normal vision, distorted vision, and
sightlessness on balance performance. Thesis, Florida State, 1968.

>

> **BF295.** Barden, Annette R. The relationship between motor ability and
social adjustment of girls. Thesis, North Carolina Durham, 1966.

>

> **BF295.** Benson, David William. The effect of fatigue on motor learning.
Thesis, USC, 1966.

>

> **BF295.** Bernasconi, Charles Edward. The relative effectiveness of varying
information feedback in the learning of a discrete sports skill. Thesis,
Washington State, 1969.

>

> **BF295.** Brassie, Paul Stanley. Acquisition and retention of a motor skill
as a function of overt self-verbalization and physical or mental practice.
Thesis, Iowa, 1968.

>

> **BF295.** Byrd, Michael Reagan. Comparison of motor ability of normal and
mentally retarded children at the intermediate level. Thesis, Texas, 1969.

>

> **BF295.** Childrey, Anita M. The relationship of hand-eye coordination as
measured by the pursuit rotor and selected motor tasks at various age levels.
Thesis, North Carolina Greensboro, 1967.

>

> **BF295.** Chrietzberg, Agnes L. The relationship between maternal guidance
during motor performance and the motor skill of preschool children. Thesis,
Florida State,1969.

>

> **BF295.** Cox, Kenneth Mervin. An experiment in teaching complex motor
skills to university freshman male students using continuous and discrete
concept sequences with and without instant videotape replay. 1969.

>

> **BF295.** Doyle, John F. The effects of two types of practice on motor
learning at different skill levels. Thesis, Pennsylvania State, 1968.

>

> **BF295.** Fulton, Marjorie E. The relationship between estimation and
achievement of specific motor skills. Thesis, Smith, 1962.

>

> **BF295.** Gallagher, James Dennis. Motor learning characteristics of low
skilled college men. Thesis, Pennsylvania State, 1968.

>

> **BF295.** Hamerslough, Walter Scott. The effectiveness of three methods of
instruction followed by mental rehearsal in learning three complex gross-motor
tasks. Thesis, Oregon, 1971.

>

> **BF295.** Higgins, Joseph Ronald. Performance phenomena involved in
arresting errors in movement. Thesis, Stanford, 1969.

>

> **BF295.** Irvin, Melva E. Comparison of the learning of a dynamic and a
static balance skill. Thesis, Pennsylvania State, 1968.

>

> **BF295.** Leaming, Thomas Wayman. The effects of praise and reproof as a
function of intelligence and extraversion-introversion in learning a
kinesthetic task. 1968.

>

> **BF295.** Luneke, Sheryl Mae. An investigation of the ability of the
student to generalize selected concepts learned through object projection
instruction. 1970.

>

> **BF295.** MacGillivary, William Warren. The relationship of certain
underlying capacities to ability level in a complex gross motor skill. Thesis,
Alberta, 1965.

>

> **BF295.** Marcus, Judith. The immediate effects of altered resistance upon
speed of movement. Thesis, Pennsylvania State, 1967.

>

> **BF295.** Montgomery, John Miller. Retroactive inhibition and mental
practice. Thesis, Oregon, 1970.

>

> **BF295.** Nation, Edna Earle. The effect of physical education instruction
upon movement concept. Thesis, North Carolina Woman's College, 1963.

>

> **BF295.** Nelson, Sara Marie. An investigatior of the relationship between
the real self-concept: ideal self-concept and motor ability of eighth grade
girls in physical education. Thesis, North Carolina Greensboro, 1965.

>

> **BF295.** Paulat, James Gustav. The effects of augmented videotaped
information feedback and loop film models upon learning of a complex motor
skill. Thesis, Stanford, 1969.

>

> **BF295.** Pesaresi, Edward. The effect of observation by experimenters
differing in authority on gross motor performance. Thesis, Syracuse, 1969.

>

> **BF295.** Phipps, Stephen J. Effects of mental practice on the acquisition
of motor skills of varying complexity. Thesis, Pennsylvania State, 1968.

>

> **BF295.** Richardson, Dorothy Anne. A study of the effect of different
approaches to gymnasitics on movement concept. Thesis, North Carolina
Greensboro, 1967.

>

> **BF295.** Richardson, Peggy Ann. The relationship in college women of high
and low motor ability to personality, aptitude, and scholastic achievement.
Thesis, Ohio State, 1965.

>

> **BF295.** Smoll, Frank Loius. Specificity and delay of information feedback
as factors in the learning of a motor skill. Thesis, Wisconsin, 1970.

>

> **BF295.** Walker, Virginia R. Visual cues and performance of a motor skill.
Thesis, Pennsylvania State, 1968.

>

> **BF295.** Westall, Karlette Vourlis. The influence of an auditory rhythmic
pattern on the learning of gross movement tasks. Thesis, Berkeley, 1963.

>

> **BF295.** White, Wesley. Relationships of aspects of body concept
creativity and sports proficiency. Thesis, Wisconsin, 1971.

>

> **BF295.** Wilberg, Robert Bernard. The effect of recall from short-term
memory on a continuous tracking response. Thesis, Oregon, 1967.

>

> **BF295.** Wyrick, Waneen. Comparison of motor creativity with verbal
creativity, motor ability, and intelligence. Thesis, Texas, 1968.

>

> **BF317.** Babin, Wayne Louis. The effects of various work loads on simple
reaction latency as related to selected physical parameters. Thesis, Southern
Mississippi, 1966.

>

> **BF317.** Condon, Jean Averill. A comparison of reaction time at different
stages of the menstrual cycle. Thesis, Iowa, 1965.

>

> **BF317.** Considine, William James. Reflex and reaction times within and
between athletes and non-athletes. Thesis, Illinios State, 1966.

>

> **BF317.** Eskridge, Veronica L. The effects of limited training in hypnosis
upon reaction time. Thesis, Western Kentucky, 1971.

>

> **BF317.** McClimon, Daniel Robert. The effects of strenuous exercise upon
total body reaction time. Thesis, Washington State, 1965.

>

> **BF317.** Marteniuk, Ronald George. The effects of pre-induced muscular
tension on motor performance. Thesis, Alberta, 1966.

>

> **BF317.** Moore, Claudia Ellen. The effects of alcohol on accelerator-brake
response times. Thesis, Illinios, 1969.

>

> **BF317.** Pistochini, Gordon Arthur. A comparison of reaction time,
movement time, and lever length. Thesis, Sacramento State College, 1967.

>

> **BF317.** Plunkett, Carol. The effect of the psychological components of
competition on reaction time in tennis. Thesis, UNC Greensboro, 1967.

>

> **BF317.** Schmidt, Richard Allen. Motor factors in coincident timing.
Thesis, Illinios, 1967.

>

> **BF317.** Smith, Peter Evan. Investigation of total-body and arm measures
of reaction time, movement time, and completion time for twelve, fourteen, and
seventeen year old athletes and nonparticipants. Oregon, 1968.

>

> **BF317.** Waechter, John Edward. Comparison of the performance of selected
groups of athletes and non-athletes on a transit reaction. Oregon, 1971.

>

> **BF321.** Sampson, Orwyn. Attention and learning selected motor skills.
Thesis, Oregon, 1967.

>

> **BF337.E9.** McPherson, Barry David. Psycholgical effects of an exercise
program for post-cardiac and normal adult men. Thesis, Western Ontario, 1965.

>

> **BF367.** Moody, Dorothy Lee. Imagery differences among women of varying
levels of experience, interests, and abilities in motor skills. Thesis,
Pennsylvania State,1965.

>

> **BF371.** Carre, Frank Alexander. Increasing torque as a kinesthetically
dependent variable in short-term memory. Thesis, Alberta, 1969.

>

> **BF371.** Selder, Dennis James. Proactive inhibition for a motor response
during short term memory. Thesis, Ohio State, 1968.

>

> **BF371.** Sharp, Robert Harold. Processing demands of kinesthetic
information in short-term memory. Thesis, Alberta, 1971.

>

> **BF371.** Stafford, Judith Annette. The effect of gross movement on verbal
memorization. Thesis, UCLA, 1965.

>

> **BF378.A75.** Bassett, Graeme Reid. The development of a scale to measure
male attitudes toward regular physical exercise. Thesis, Washington State,
1967.

>

> **BF408.** Dorman, Jacquelyne L. Creativity as a significant concept in
sport, dance and physical activity. Thesis, Massachusetts, 1968.

>

> **BF408.** Hjermstad, Dorothy Robinson. Evoking creativity a particular
approach to dance improvisation. Thesis, Wisconsin, 1971.

>

> **BF408.** Thomas, Carolyn E. A comparison of the verbal creativity of
highly and average skilled college women dancers and highly and average
skilled college women athletes. Thesis, Washington, 1967.

>

> **BF431.** Coefield, John Robert. Relationships between and maturity,
physical and personality measures of twelve-year-old boys in sixth grade.
Thesis, Oregon, 1964.

>

> **BF431.** Kemp, Paul Clement. A study of academic achievement of
nonsuccessful and successful athletes Thesis, Iowa, 1956.

>

> **BF468.** Ellis, Michael John. Proprioceptive factors in operative time
estimation. Thesis, Illinios, 1966.

>

> **BF475.** Briggs, Ruth Arlene. The development of an instrument for
assessment of motoric rhythmic performance. Thesis, Missouri, 1968.

>

> **BF475.** Colvin, Carolyn. The effectof rhythmic training and relaxation on
sensory-motor rhythmic ability. Thesis, Indiana, 1969.

>

> **BF475.** Freytag, Janet Geiger. The relationship of rhythmic ability and
background in dance and music to racial and socioeconomic background. Thesis,
Washington, 1967.

>

> **BF475.** Friedman, Abraham Morris. Relationship of a rhythmic motor
response to selected tempi. Thesis, San Diego State College, 1966.

>

> **BF531.** Larson, Edgar Ole. Emotional responses of college basketball
players. Thesis, Oregon, 1966.

>

> **BF575.A3.** Kenworthy, Susan L. A study to determine if participation in
sport reduces the tendency toward displacement following mild frustration.
Thesis, Springfield College, 1968.

>

> **BF575.A3.** Laird, E Marie. Comparison of aggressive responses among and
between women athletes and non-athletes at three educational levels. Thesis,
Springfield College, 1971.

>

> **BF575.A3.** Martin, Lawrence A. The effects of competition upon the
aggressive responses of basketball players and wrestlers. Thesis, Springfield
College, 1969.

>

> **BF575.A6.** Bush, Jone J. Anxiety and performence at three levels of
competition in women's intercollegiate gymnastics. Thesis, Springfield
College, 1970.

>

> **BF575.A6.** Ford, Robert. Anxiety in non-competitive and pre-competive
situations involving intercollegiate football players. Thesis, Springfield
College, 1970.

>

> **BF575.A6.** McGowen, Kenneth. The effects of a competitive situation upon
the motor performance of high-anxious and low-anxious boys. Thesis,
Springfield College, 1968.

>

> **BF637.B4.** Halberg, Kathleen Joan. The effects of selected success
criteria of recreational activities upon the observable behavior of conduct
problem boys. Oregon, 1971.

>

> **BF637.L4.** Van Bibber, Edward George. The development of a scale to
measure leadership attitudes of college athletes. Thesis, Boston, 1953.

>

> **BF637.L4.** Walter, Janet Louise. Leadership: considerations and
implications for women in physical education. Thesis, North Carolina, 1968.

>

> **BF698.** Betts, Edith. The relationship of persistence at a physical task
as measured by the maintenance of a submaximal muscular contraction to other
selected factors. Thesis, Oregon, 1968.

>

> **BF698.** Brady, Paul Richard Joseph. The relationship of introversion-
extraversion to physical persistence. Thesis, Alberta, 1966.

>

> **BF698.** Clayton, Diane Elthea. The relationships among attitudes toward
physical activity, personality, and self-concept. Thesis, Washington, 1969.

>

> **BF698.** Cross, John Alan. Relationships between selected physical
characteristics of boys at twelve and fifteen years of age, and their
personality characteristics at eighteen years of age. Thesis, Oregon, 1969.

>

> **BF698.** Gottesman, Donald T. Relationships between Cattell's Sixteen
Personality Factor Questionnaire and physique, structure, strength, and motor
traits of college men. Thesis, Oregon, 1964.

>

> **BF698.** Jerome, Wendy Carole Foster. A study of the personality
characteristics of female athletes and non-participants. Thesis, Oregon, 1969.

>

> **BF698.** Parsons, David Roy. Personality traits of national representative
swimmers, Canada 1962. Thesis, British Columbia, 1965.

>

> **BF698.** Reynolds, Robert Monti. Responses on the Davidson Adjective Check
List as related to maturity, physical and mental characteristics of thirteen
year old boys. Thesis, Oregon, 1965.

>

> **BF698.** Rushall, Brent Sydney. The demonstration and evaluation of a
research model for the investigation of the relationship between personality
and physical performance categories. Thesis, Bloomington, 1969.

>

> **BF698.** Seehafer, Roger Wayne. The effects of specific blood
concentrations of alcohol on simulated driving ability and selected
personality factors. Thesis, Illinois, 1966.

>

> **BF698.2.** Feinstein, Susan Ruth. The effects of alcohol on personality.
Thesis, Illinios, 1969.

>

> **BF698.2.** Throneberry, Connie A. An investigation of weight change as
related to personality traits and activity programs. Thesis, Cal State, Long
Beach, 1968.

>

> **BF698.2.** Trujillo, Cecilia Marie. Effects of beginning swimming
instruction on selected personality traits. Thesis, Washington, 1969.

>

> **BF698.4.** Brown, Edward Albert. A comparative study of personality traits
of varsity skiers, varsity wrestlers, varsity swimmers, and collegiate non-
athletes at selected institutions of higher learning in the intermountain
area. Utah, 1969.

>

> **BF698.4.** Chipman, Leroy P. A comparison of paricipants and non-
participants in intercollegiate athletics with respect to selected personality
traits. Thesis, Springfield College, 1968.

>

> **BF698.4.** Harris, Dorothy Virginia. An investigation of psychological
characteristics of university women with high and low fitness indices. Thesis,
State University of Iowa, 1965.

>

> **BF698.4.** Joy, Carol Margaret. A study of the relationship of certain
personality variables to participation in physical education. Thesis, Smith
College, 1968

>

> **BF698.4.** Kelley, Sharon Lee. Personality characteristics of female high
school athletes and nonparticipants in athletics. Thesis, Iowa, 1969.

>

> **BF698.4.** Loy, John Wilson. Socio-psychological attributes of English
swimming coaches differentially adopting a new technology. Thesis, Wisconsin,
1967.

>

> **BF698.4.** McClenney, Byron Nelson. A comparison of personality
characteristics, self-concepts, and academic aptitiude of selected college men
classified according to performance on a test of physical fitness. 1969.

>

> **BF698.4.** Malumphy, Theresa Mary. The personality and general
characteristics of women athletes in intercollegiate competition. Thesis, Ohio
State, 1966.

>

> **BF698.4.** Niblock, Marjorie Winifred. Personality traits and intelligence
level of female athletes and non-participants from McNally High School.
Thesis, Washington, 1967.

>

> **BF698.4.** Olson, Edward Carl. Identification of personality differences
among male tennis champions. Thesis, Ohio State, 1966.

>

> **BF698.4.** Riccio, Dennis Ray. A comparative study of personality trait
differences between tenth, eleventh, and twelfth grade wrestlers and non-
athletes at the same grade levels. Thesis, Utah, 1969.

>

> **BF698.4.** Slaughter, Mary Hoke. An analysis of the relationship between
somatotype and personality profiles of college women. Thesis, Illinois, 1968.

>

> **BF698.4.** Walterscheid, Theresa. A study of the effects of competition
upon the personality adjustment of high school girls. Thesis, North Texas
State, 1968.

>

> **BF721.** Stafford, Elba Gene. Single-year and longitudinal comparisons of
intelligence and academic achievement of elementary and junior high school
athletes and non-participants. Thesis, Oregon, 1968.

>

> **BF724.** Ferguson, Beth Allen. Personality differences between adolescent
girls of high and low motor performance. Thesis, Colorado, 1963.

>

> **BF724.** Gabert, Trent Elroy. An investigation of selected factors related
to consistently reproducing a specified velocity and to perception of change
in velocity of a self-projected object in three-dimensional space. 1970.

>

> **BF724.** Kelly, Colin Charles. Socialization into sport among male
adolescents from Canada, England and the United States. Thesis, Wisconsin,
1970.

>

> **BF724.** O'Brian, Carol Kathleen. The relationship between personality and
attitude toward physical activity. Thesis, Wisconsin, 1966.

>

> **BF724.** Samuelson, Genelle Faye. The effects of a specially structured
seven week physical education class upon the self-concepts of low self-esteem
tenth grade girls. Thesis, North Carolina Greensboro, 1969.

>

> **BF724.** Sise, Betsy. A study of the effect of an eight week camping
experience on the self-concept of girls ages 12-14 at selected private girls'
camps. Thesis, North Carolina Greensboro, 1967.

>

> **BF724.** Storey, Stuart E. Physique and the self-fulfilling prophecy.
Thesis, Western Kentucky, 1968.

>

> **BF789.C7.** Reger, Joan Ann. Feeling states evoked by colored lighting.
Thesis, Wisconsin, 1967.

>

> **BT766.** Veliz, Dorothy Benson de. Four literary manifestations of the
concept of Christ-like perfection. Thesis, Florida, 1958.

>

> **BV1145.** Cieplik, Raymond. Physical work and amusements as concerns of
the Young Men's Christian Association, 1851-1884. Thesis, Massachusetts, 1969.

>

> **BV1145.** Friermood, Harold T. Health clubs in the YMCA with respect to
current status and development of operating standards. Thesis, New York, 1954.

>

> **BV1160.** Brock, Patrick Leonard. The attitudes and involvement of members
in the Hi-Y club program of the John R. Leach, Portland, Oregon, YMCA. Thesis,
Oregon, 1966.

>

> **BV1160.** Kujawa, Charles Cameron. A study of Y.M.C.A. club program and
organization for boys nine to eleven years of age. Thesis, Maryland, 1962.

>

> **BV5080.** Brian, Beverly Dianne. A study of the imagery in the cloud of
unknowing. Thesis, Duke, 1961.

>

> **BV5095.** Berry, Sara Lou. Religious imagery in The book of Margery Kempe.
Thesis, Florida, 1963.

>

> **CB199.** Allison, E Lavonia Ingram. Ways for effecting better intergroup
relations in desegregated public secondary physical education programs.
Thesis, New York, 1968.

>

> **DA18.** Ramsey, Julia Havlicek. The foreign policy of the British
dominions, 1931-1936. Thesis, Georgetown, 1954.

>

> **E98.R3.** Budic, Caroline Mary. Wolf ritual dances of the Northwest Coast
Indians. Thesis, Washington, 1964.

>

> **E99.P3.** Irving, John Treat. Indian sketches, taken during an expedition
to the Pawnee tribes. 1835.

>

> **E176.1.** Jackson, Walter Merwin. A study of the recreational pursuits of
American presidents. Thesis, Maryland, 1962.

>

> **E458.1.** Pollard, Edward Albert. Letters of the southern spy, in
Washington and elsewhere. 1861.

>

> **E487.** Pollard, Edward Albert. Observation in the North: eight months in
prison and on parole. 1865.

>

> **E666.** Pollard, Edward Albert. The lost cause regained. 1868.

>

> **E842.1.** Metcalfe, Alan. The contributions of John F. Kennedy to physical
education and recreation. Thesis, Wisconsin, 1966.

>

> **F231.** Pollard, Edward Albert. The Virginia tourist. Sketches of the
springs and mountains of Virginia; containing an exposition of fields for the
tourist in Virginia; natural beauties and wonders of the state; also accounts
of its mineral springs; and medical guide to the use of waters. 1870.

>

> **F324.** Patterson, Lucy Adelaide (Holloway). A study of some place-names
of southeastern Lee County, Alabama. Thesis, Auburn, 1964.

>

> **F590.A1.** Pooley, John Clifford. Ethnic soccer clubs in Milwaukee: a
study in assimilation. Thesis, Wisconsin, 1968.

>

> **F3439.3.D2.** Weaver, Wilhelmina Clark. Dance as a cultural trait of some
cultural groups of the Inca Empire at the time of the Spanish conquest.
Thesis, Wisconsin, 1970.

>

> **GN4.** Archives of archaeology. no. 1-29. 1959-

>

> **GN58.U5.** Norman, Stephen Laurance. Collation of anthropometric research
comparing American males: Negro and Caucasion. Thesis, Oregon, 1968.

>

> **GN59.A3.** Carter, J E Lindsay. The physiques of Royal New Zealand Air
Force men. 1965.

>

> **GN59.B3.** Imlay, Robert Curtis. The physiques of college baseball players
in San Diego, California. Thesis, San Diego State, 1966.

>

> **GN62.** Sleet, David A. Somatotype and social image. Thesis, San Diego
State, 1968

>

> **GN62.** Sutorius, Gordon Clark. Somatotypes of United States rowers.
Thesis, San Diego State, 1969.

>

> **GN63.** Herron, Robert Ernest. The constancy of physique in adolescent
boys. Thesis, Illinois, 1960.

>

> **GN63.** Sinclair, Gary Dane. Stability of physique types of boys nine
through twelve years of age. Thesis, Oregon, 1966.

>

> **GN67.W6.** Booth, Marilyn Joyce. Skinfold measurements as an estimate of
specific gravity and of the percentage of body fat. Thesis, Alberta, 1969.

>

> **GN67.W6.** Bowes, Barbara Floruss. The effect of specific exercises on
selected skinfold and girth measures of college women. Thesis, Pennsylvania
State, 1967.

>

> **GN67.W6.** DeWoskin, Sheila F. Somatotypes of women in a fitness program.
Thesis, San Diego State, 1967.

>

> **GN67.W6.** McLure, Carolyn Colvin. The physiques of professional and
amateur women golfers. Thesis, San Diego State, 1967.

>

> **GN67.W6.** Tufts, Sharon Anne. The effects of diet and physical activity
on selected measures of college women. Thesis, Iowa, 1969.

>

> **GN67.W6.** Westlake, Doris Joan. Somatotypes of female track and field
competitors. Thesis, San Diego State, 1967.

>

> **GN231.** Fullilove, Margaret Ann. A critical analysis of the problems
encountered in posture research. Thesis, North Carolina Greensboro, 1969.

>

> **GN231.** Heisal, William A. An investigation into human head balance.
Thesis, Michigan, 1958.

>

> **GN233.** Holdeman, Janie Joyce. An investigation of lateral dominance as
measured by balance, kinesthetic positioning, and flexibility. Thesis, Smith,
1962.

>

> **GN233.** Perry, Colleen Ann Wylde. An investigation of leg preference
tests. Thesis, Washington, 1968.

>

> **GN233.** Pinkerton, Barbara Jeanne. Analysis of foot preference as
indicated by selected tests: first grade boys and girls. Thesis, Washington,
1970.

>

> **GN233.** Robinson, Edwin Nelson. A comparison of laterally dominant to
crossed dominant individuals in tests of reaction time and hand-eye
coordination. Thesis, California Santa Barbara, 1965.

>

> **GN454.5.** Simri, Uriel. The religious and magical function of ball games
in various cultures. Thesis, West Virginia, 1966.

>

> **GN455.B3.** Cox, Allan Elton. An historical analysis of competitive rubber
ball games in Mesoamerica, Arizona and the Greater Antilles. Thesis, Alberta,
1967.

>

> **GN456.89.** Salter, Michael Albert. Games and pastimes of the Australian
aboriginal. Thesis, Alberta, 1967.

>

> **GN456.98 P6.** Jones, Kevin George. Games and physical activities of the
ancient Polynesians and relationships to culture. Thesis, Alberta, 1967.

>

> **GR35.** Folklore Institute of Japan. Japanese folklore dictionary,
compiled by the Folklore Institute of Japan under the supervision of Kunio
Yanagita. 1958.

>

> **GR110.** Roberts, Leonard Ward. The tales and songs of the Couch family.
Lexington, 1959.

>

> **GT1741.** Folkers, Ireva A. Mayfair for the modern dance (a guide for
costume design). Thesis, Iowa, 1967.

>

> **GV3.I57.** Cadieux, Julien. Past and present influences of the
International Recreation Association upon development of recreation in member
countries. Thesis, Oregon, 1970.

>

> **GV14.** Carls, Ernest Glenn. A study of social motives and patterns of
leisure behavior. Thesis, Illinois, 1969.

>

> **GV14.** Godbey, Geoffrey Clay. An analysis of the methods for the
quantitative measurement of leisure. Thesis, Pennsylvania State, 1968.

>

> **GV14.** Kingston, George Edward. Towards a classification of the theories
of human play. Thesis, Alberta, 1968.

>

> **GV14.** Lowery, George Andrew. A multivariate analysis of the relationship
between selected leisure behavior variables and personal values. Thesis,
Illinois, 1969.

>

> **GV14.** Metcalfe, Alan. Working class 'free time' : its development and
limitations. Thesis, Wisconsin, 1968.

>

> **GV14.** Reeder, Alan Francis. The relationship of socio-economic status
and leisure pursuits during retirement. Thesis, Utah, 1968.

>

> **GV14.** Ruskin, Hillel. Principles for leisure education in the public
schools of Israel. Thesis, New York, 1968.

>

> **GV14.5.** Burkhardt, John E. Statistical comprehension for graduate
students in physical education: test and norms. Thesis, Iowa, 1969.

>

> **GV14.5.** Carlson, Nelson Thomas. The appropriateness of the analysis of
covariance to the simple-randomized design in physical education research.
Thesis, Iowa, 1967.

>

> **GV14.5.** Frost, Ardith Bernice. Crucial behavioral dimensions of first
line supervisors in municipal recreation. Thesis, Los Angeles, 1963.

>

> **GV14.5.** Morrison, Donald Hugh. A rationale for the development of
comparative physical education. Thesis, Alberta, 1967.

>

> **GV14.5.** Myers, Helen Baird. A survey of volunteer junior leader programs
in 156 recreation departments in the United States. Thesis, Maryland, 1964.

>

> **GV14.5.** Parker, Adah Donohue. Projections for the selection, training
and retention of sub-professional recreation leaders based on an analysis of
personality, interest, aptitude, and preference data. Thesis, Illinois, 1966.

>

> **GV14.5.** Purdy, Kenneth McLellan. Techniques of photography in physical
education research. Thesis, Louisiana, 1969.

>

> **GV14.5.** Roys, Keith Benjamin. Differential interests of male
administrators in community recreation as compared to other occupations
described by the Strong vocational interest approach. Thesis, Illinois, 1965.

>

> **GV14.5.** Sherrow, Jeanne Elizabeth. The effect of a creative problem
solving workshop on selected municipal recreation personnel. Thesis, Illinois,
1969.

>

> **GV14.5.** Spaeth, Marsha Jane. An analysis of administrative research in
physical education and athletics in relation to a research paradigm. Thesis,
Illinois, 1967.

>

> **GV21.** Kidd, Thomas Richard. The rise of athletic professionalism as it
relates to ancient Greek culture. A study in lieu of a thesis, Oregon, 1969.

>

> **GV31.** Lindsay, Peter L. Literary evidence of physical education among
the ancient Romans. Thesis, Alberta, 1967.

>

> **GV53.** Swanson, Richard Albin. American Protestantism and play,
1865-1915. Thesis, Ohio, 1967.

>

> **GV53.** Turik, Henry Alexander. An investigation of school district
special tax legislation for public recreation programs in six selected states.
Thesis, Illinois, 1962.

>

> **GV54.A14.** Olsen, Burton K. A study of school-sponsored and co-sponsored
recreation programs in the North Central region of the United States.
Minneapolis, 1970.

>

> **GV54.M6M5.** Goodale, Thomas Lester. An analysis of leisure behavior and
attitudes in selected Minneapolis census tracts. Thesis, Illinois, 1965.

>

> **GV54.N6A6.** Heath, Edward Henry. A semantic differential study of
attitudes relating to recreation as applied to a bicultural setting. Thesis,
Illinois, 1966.

>

> **GV54.N95.** Lindley, Donald Dean. Scope of outdoor recreation programs in
thirty-five cities in the Pacific Northwest. Thesis, Oregon, 1970.

>

> **GV54.O7P6.** Lensch, Dorothea Marie. The evolution of recreation programs
in war housing projects in Portland, Oregon, between the years 1940-1960.
Thesis, Oregon, 1966.

>

> **GV54.P4.** Reich, Charles Miller. Socioeconomic factors related to
household participation in community recreation. Thesis, Pennsylvania, 1965.

>

> **GV56.W5.** Morrison, Douglas Allen. An analysis of evaluations of the
Winnipeg Department of Parks and Recreation by the major recreation agencies
of Winnipeg and Manitoba. Thesis, Oregon, 1967.

>

> **GV75.** Watkins, Glenn G. The law and games in sixteenth century England.
Thesis, Alberta, 1969.

>

> **GV119.** Buckley, Chester W. Contemporary recreation in selected countries
and colonies of Asia. Thesis, Springfield, 1966.

>

> **GV171.** Allen, Joel Root. Use of a survey intrument to determine
significant school recreation programs differences. Thesis, Los Angeles, 1967.

>

> **GV171.** Elliott, Albert R. The development of an instrument for the
evaluation of public recreation programs. Thesis, Purdue, 1969.

>

> **GV171.** Halstead, Robert E. A survey of a rural population and the effect
of physical education upon the selection of leisure activities. Thesis,
Wisconsin, 1964.

>

> **GV171.** Wightman, Brian John. Extra-curricular physical activity of
entering university freshmen during their high school senior year, as a
function of social class, residence location, and size of high school
graduating class. Thesis, Wisconsin, 1965.

>

> **GV182.2.** Hill, Samuel Eugene. The design of a farm-recreation facility.
Illinios, 1964.

>

> **GV182.2.** Munson, Karl Franklin. Opinions of providers and users about
site quality for water-oriented recreation on eight small lakes in Arkansas.
Thesis, Illinios, 1968.

>

> **GV182.2.** Storey, Edward Herbert. A method of estimating the demand for
outdoor recreation. Thesis, Illinios, 1964.

>

> **GV183.** Horn, Lois Blanche. Factors in voluntary physical activity
participation of university women students. Thesis, Washington, 1968.

>

> **GV183.** Miller, Doris Ida. A comparison of women physical recreation
participants and nonparticipants with respect to selected personality factors
and physical education backgrounds. Thesis, Oregon, 1964.

>

> **GV183.5.** Miller, Elizabeth Ann. An analysis of recreation for the ill
and the handicapped in selected local public recreation systems. Thesis,
Illinios, 1963.

>

> **GV54.N95.** Lindley, Donald Dean. Scope of outdoor recreation programs in
thirty-five cities in the Pacific Northwest. Thesis, Oregon, 1970.

>

> **GV54.O7P6.** Lensch, Dorothea Marie. The evolution of recreation programs
in war housing projects in Portland, Oregon, between the years 1940 and 1960.
Thesis, Oregon, 1960.

>

> **GV54.P4.** Reich, Charles Miller. Socioeconomic factors related to
household participation in community recreation. Thesis, Pennsylvania State,
1965.

>

> **GV56.W5.** An analysis of evaluations of the Winnipeg Department of Parks
and Recreation agencies of Winnipeg and Manitoba. Thesis, Oregon, 1967.

>

> **GV75.** Watkins, Glen G. The law and games in sixteenth century England.
Thesis, Alberta, 1969.

>

> **GV119.** Buckley, Chester W. Contemporary recreation in selected countries
and colonies of Asia. Thesis, Springfield, 1966.

>

> **GV171.** Allen, Joel Root. Use of a survey instrument to determine
significant school recreation program differences. Thesis, UCLA, 1967.

>

> **GV171.** Elliott, Albert R. The development of an instrument for the
evaluation of public recreation programs. Thesis, Purdue, 1969.

>

> **GV171.** Halstead, Robert E. A survey of a rural population and the effect
of physical education upon the selction of leisure time activities. Thesis,
Wisconsin, 1964.

>

> **GV171.** Wightman, Brian John. Extra-curricular physical activity of
entering university freshmen during their high school senior year, as a
function of social class, residence location and size of high school
graduating class. Thesis, Wisconsin, 1965.

>

> **GV182.2.** Hill, Samuel Eugene. The design of a farm-recreation facility.
Urbana, Ill. Thesis, University of Illinois, 1964.

>

> **GV182.2.** Munson, Karl Franklin. Opinions of providers and users about
site quality for water-orientated recreation on eight small lakes in Arkansas.
Thesis, University of Illinois, 1968.

>

> **GV182.2.** Storey, Edward Herbert. A method of estimating the demand for
outdoor recreation. Thesis, University of Illinois, 1964.

>

> **GV183.** Horn, Lois Blanche. Factors in Voluntary physical activity
participation of university women students. Thesis, University of Washington,
1968.

>

> **GV183.** Miller, Doris Ida. A comparison of women physical recreation
participants and non participants with respect to selected personality factors
and physical education backgrounds.

>

> **GV183.5.** Miller, Elizabeth Ann. An analysis of recreation for the ill
and the handicapped in selected local public recreation systems. Thesis,
University of Illinois, 1963

>

> **GV183.7.** Neal, Larry Lee. An investigation of attitudes toward and
participation of special education teenagers and their non-retarded peers in
Oregon's state parks. Thesis, Oregon, 1969.

>

> **GV192.** Harrison, Gerard Alfred. An instument for evaluating family
campgrounds. Thesis, Indiana, 1968.

>

> **GV197.H3.** Stein, Thomas Adolph. Some effective outcomes accompanying a
camping experience of physically handicapped adults. Thesis, Wisconsin, 1962.

>

> **GV197.S3.** Gibson, William Garnet. Evaluation of outdoor education using
Guttman scales and sociometric analysis. Thesis, Alberta, 1966.

>

> **GV198.C6.** Saunders, Katherine. An exploration of the relationships
between camp counseling and the teaching of physical education. Thesis,
Wisconsin, 1966.

>

> **GV201.** Research quarterly. v 1-30. Washington D.C. 1930-1959.

>

> **GV203.A4.** Dayton, Norma Marie. An investigation of the aims and
objectives of the American Association for Health, Physical Education, and
Recreation from 1930 to 1968. Thesis, Utah, 1969.

>

> **GV203.F6.** Cleland, Troy Sumpter. History of the Florida Association for
Health, Physical Education, and Recreation, 1919 to 1965. Thesis, Florida,
1966.

>

> **GV207.** National College Physical Education Association for Men.
Committee on Terminology. Glossary of physical education terms. Houston,
Texas, 1937.

>

> **GV211.** Studer, Virginia Lee. The historical development of human
movement fundamentals for college women in the United States. Thesis,
Illinios, 1966.

>

> **GV223.** Lynn, Minnie L. Major emphases in physical education in the
United States. Thesis, Pittsburgh, 1944.

>

> **GV223.** McPherson, Frances Ann. Development of ideas in physical
education in the secondary schools in the United States between 1889 and 1920.
Thesis, Wisconsin, 1965.

>

> **GV223.** Wacker, Hazel Marie. The History of the private single purpose
institutions which prepared teachers of physical education in the United
States of America from 1861 to 1958. New York, 1959.

>

> **GV224.A1C2.** DeGroot, Dudley Sargent. A history of physical education in
California (1848-1939). Thesis, Stanford, 1940.

>

> **GV224.A1M2.** Costello, Richard A. The relationship of attitudes held by
senior boys and rated physical education programs in selected high schools in
Maine. Thesis, Springfield, 1965.

>

> **GV224.A1M8.** Frank, James. The relationship of some selected socio-
economic factors to changes in physical education programs in certain
localities in Missouri. Springfield,1963.

>

> **GV224A1N6.** Comer, James L. An evaluation of the physical education
program for boys in selected New Mexico senior high schools. Thesis, Utah,
1964.

>

> **GV224.A1W6.** Gruber, Donald Albert. The status of physical education in
public high schools of Wisconsin since the repeal of the time requirement.
Thesis, Wisconsin,1966.

>

> **GV224.A1W6.** Jones, Annie Lee. A fiscal study of physical education at
the school district level in Wisconsin. Thesis, Wisconsin, 1965.

>

> **GV224.A1W6.** Perry, Carol Jean. A study of content and conditions related
to programs of physical education for girls in the secondary schools of
Wisconsin in 1964-65. Thesis, Wisconsin, 1966.

>

> **GV224.D6.** Swanson, Richard A. History of physical education in the
Detroit Public Schools. Thesis, Wayne, 1964.

>

> **GV225.M6.** Boucher, Jean Louis. Physical education in a bi-cultural
society: the characteristics of school physical education programs as a
function of the social values held by the two major ethnic groups in the City
of Montreal. Thesis, Wisconsin, 1967.

>

> **GV245.** Jacobs, David Hugh. An investigative study of physical education
programs on the primary and secondary school levels in England. Thesis,
Missouri, 1966.

>

> **GV247.** Kerestes, Alexander. Physical education and sport in Hungary.
Thesis, Alberta, 1967.

>

> **GV333.A3.** Langsner, Franklin Royal. A study of the works and
contributions of George Baird Affleck to health education, physical education
and recreation education. Thesis, Springfield, 1967.

>

> **GV333.A5.** Peterson, Hazel Clara. Dorothy S. Ainsworth: her life,
professional career and contributions to physical education. Thesis, Ohio,
1968.

>

> **GV333.A7.** McKeon, John Lawrence. A study of the works and contributions
of Ernst Hermann Arnold to the profession of health and physical education.
Thesis, Springfield, 1965.

>

> **GV333.B7.** Napier, Anthony E. The contributions of Margaret Christina
Brown to teacher education and physical education. Thesis, Pennsylvania, 1963.

>

> **GV333.C55.** Ranta, Vicki Eileen. H. Harrison Clarke: his life and
contributions to physical education. Thesis, Oregon, 1969.

>

> **GV333.H3.** Lynn, Minnie L. An historical analysis of the professional
career of Delphine Hanna. Thesis, Pennsylvania, 1937.

>

> **GV333.L3.** Eaton, John Dougles. The life and professional contributions
of Arthur Stanley Lamb, M.D., to physical education in Canada. Thesis, Ohio,
1964.

>

> **GV333.N3.** Dewar, John. The life and professional contributions of James
Naismith. Thesis, Florida, 1965.

>

> **GV333.N38.** Jessup, Harvey Michael. Jay Bryan Nash: his contributions and
influences in the fields of physical, health, recreation, camping and outdoor
recreation. Thesis, New York, 1967.

>

> **GV333.N5.** Tong, Curtis Whitfield. John Herbert Nichols, M.D.: a life of
leadership in physical education and athletics. Thesis, Ohio, 1968.

>

> **GV333.S37.** Feld, Allen Abraham. Harry Alexander Scott, teacher, scholar,
administrator. Thesis, Utah, 1970.

>

> **GV333.S5.** Collins, Miriam. The life of Jackson Roger Sharman, Sr., and
his contributions to health, physical education, and recreation. Alberta,
Canada, 1969.

>

> **GV333.V3.** Daulman, Lois Marie. Winfred Van Hagen: leader in California
physical education. Thesis, Berkeley, 1968.

>

> **GV333.W58.** Culver, Anna Beth. Walter J. Wittich: physical educator,
1885-1953. Thesis, Wisconsin, 1967.

>

> **GV333.Z5.** Wood, Nan Elizabeth. Elizabeth K. Zimmerli: a master teacher
and administrator of physical education at Lock Haven State College from 1946
through 1966. Thesis, Florida, 1946.

>

> **GV341.** Ambler, Victor Herbert. The effect of fatigue and non-fatigue
upon the learning of selected basic soccer skills. Thesis, Washington, 1966.

>

> **GV341.** Anderson, Cynthia C. A method of data collection and processing
for cinematographic analysis of human movement in three dimensions. Madison,
Wisconsin, 1970.

>

> **GV341.** Bangerter, Blauer Lorenzo. Contributive components in the
vertical jump. Thesis, Utah, 1964.

>

> **GV341.** Bartee, Barbara Ann. The effect of applications of the principle
of overload on the development of skill. Thesis,USC, 1965.

>

> **GV341.** Bass, Buford Harold. The effects of isometric exercises on
underhand throwing ability. Thesis, Louisiana, 1965.

>

> **GV341.** Bates, James Dale. The effects of static and dynamic strength
training and position of exercise on the acquisition of strength, speed of
movement, reaction time, and endurance. Thesis, Louisiana, 1967.

>

> **GV341.** Baumgarten, Naomi R. The effect of warm-up on the performance of
a simple task involving speed of gross movements of the hand and arm. Thesis,
Temple, 1965.

>

> **GV341.** Bench, Douglas. The pain and fatigue suppressing effect of
auditory stimili on maximal physical performance. Thesis, Toledo, 1969.

>

> **GV341.** Blaikie, William. How to get strong and how to stay so. New York,
Harper, 1879.

>

> **GV341.** Blohm, Fred. Running endurance performance as affected by warm-up
and varied rest intervals. Thesis, Arkansas, 1969.

>

> **GV341.** Brink, Benjamin Deane. The body builder, Robert J. Roberts; being
a collection of drills and health hints, and appreciations of the man who
blazed the trail for physical education in the Young Men's Christian
Association, with an introduction by Luther H. Gulick. New York, Association
Press, 1916.

>

> **GV341.** Brookins, James V. An investigation of the effect of running as a
part of a high school wrestling training program to "fitness" and success in
competitive wrestling. Thesis, Wisconson, 1969.

>

> **GV341.** Caplan, Clavin Stephen. Transfer of the fatigue in motor
performance. Thesis, Berkley, 1970.

>

> **GV341.** Charles, Gary L. The effect of selected explosive weight training
exercises upon leg strength, free running speed and explosive power. Thesis,
South Dakota 1966.

>

> ****Cobb, Robert A. The effects of selected visual conditions on throwing
accuracy. Thesis, Springfield, 1969.

>

>  **GV341.** Curtis, Bruce Richard. Differences in self-concept and
performance of a gross motor task. Thesis, Illinois, 1968.

>

> **GV341.** Dick, Bruce Van Leuvan. A comparative study of distance, interval
and mixed methods of training for competitive swimming. Thesis, Indiana, 1968

>

> **GV341.** Dorfman, Sandra Phyllis. Attitude toward physical activity as a
function of religious identification, with particular reference to Judaism.
Thesis, Wisconsin, 1968.

>

> **GV341.** Dotson, Charles Orville. An investigation of multivariate test
criteria and their application to intergrated development components. Thesis,
Purdue, 1968.

>

> **GV341.** Dufty, Douglas Jay. An explosive weight-training program and its
effect upon the leg power of nonwrestlers and their performance times of three
selected wrestling maneuvers. Thesis, South Dakota, 1968.

>

> **GV341.** Fisher, Arnold Garth. An experimental investigation of the
effects of a weight training program on underdeveloped junior high school
boys. Thesis, Sacramento, 1966.

>

> **GV341.** Glidewell, William Foster. An investigation of various warm-up
procedures in relation to physical performance. Thesis, Texas, 1964.

>

> **GV341.** Gottshall, Donald R. The effects of two training programs on
reflex time, reaction time and the level of physical fitness. Thesis,
Springfield, 1962.

>

> **GV341.** Guess, Liles Clay. A comparison of two training programs for
maintaining increased muscular strength developed during an off-season
conditioning program. Thesis, Texas, 1967.

>

> **GV341.** Gulick,Luther Halsey. Physical education by muscular exercise.
Philadelphia, 1904.

>

> **GV341.** Harper, Donald DeWayne. Effect of interval, recreational,
calisthenics and marching training programs on fitness in man. Thesis, Ohio,
1966.

>

> **GV341.** Holmes, Harold Zachary, Jr. Effects of training on chronic health
complaints of middle-aged men. Thesis, Illinois, 1969.

>

> **GV341.** Jackson, Andrew Stonewall. A factor analysis of tests of muscular
strength, endurance, and gross motor patterns that involve projecting objects
and projecting the body. Oregon, 1969.

>

> **GV341.** Jette, Maurice John. A study of long-term physical activity in
sedentary middle-aged men. Thesis, Illinois, 1969.

>

> **GV341.** Johnston, Bower Lyttleton. A study of the relationships among
self-concept, movement concept, and physical fitness, and the effects of a
physical condtioning program and a sports-skill program upon self-concept and
movement concept. Oregon, 1969.

>

> **GV341.** Katch, Victor L. The role of maximal oxygen intake as a
determinant of endurance performance. Thesis, Berkeley, 1969.

>

> **GV341.** Kendrick, Larry Lionel. Performance in selected gross motor
skills before and after fatiguing exercise. Thesis, Lousiana, 1967.

>

> **GV341.** Kennison, James Edward. The effects of four training programs on
the acquisition of speed and accuracy in motor performance. Thesis, Louisiana,
1966.

>

> **GV341.** Kight, Carl Ray. The effects of experimentally induced variations
in body weight upon power. Thesis, Louisiana, 1967.

>

> **GV341.** Kinne, Robbin Kluyskens. The relationship between the achievement
of athletes and non-athletes in physical education, academics, and military
leadership at the United States Naval Academy. Oregon, 1970.

>

> **GV341.** Kuhn, Werner. The effects of physical warm-up and mental
rehearsal on the performance of experienced and non-experienced soccer players
in the soccer dribble test. Thesis, Oregon, 1971.

>

> **GV341.** Luttgens, Kathryn. The construction of a film for use in
instruction in posture and body mechanics. Thesis, Iowa, 1957.

>

> **GV341.** Lyle, Berton Edward. An evaluation of the speed exercise
technique in developing the components of fitness. Thesis, Texas, 1969.

>

> **GV341.** Mequi, Aparicio Hipolito. Experiences affecting male university
students who exhibit extreme positive and negative attitudes towards physical
activity. Thesis, oregon, 1970.

>

> **GV341.** Morris, William McKinley. The effects of isometric and isotonic
weight training exercises upon quadricep strength and performance in a middle
distance running event. 1969.

>

> **GV341.** Newman, James Edward. The relationships among physical work
capacity, physical fitness index and performance time in swimmers throughout a
season of training. Thesis, Alberta, 1968.

>

> **GV341.** Nicolau, Anthero. Comparison of an experimental and a traditional
program of preseason football conditioning. Thesis, Springfield College, 1965.

>

> **GV341.** O'Quinn, Michael Van Dusen. A comparison of conventional and in-
plane Exer-genie training techniques in developing a forward passer. 1968.

>

> **GV341.** Pecka, Alvin Dale. The effectiveness of rope jumping as an
activity for improving agility of junior high school boys. Thesis, Washington
State, 1965.

>

> **GV341.** Pencek, Richard W. Effects of weight training on body weight,
body density, and body fat. Thesis, Penn State, 1966.

>

> **GV341.** Pinholster, Garland F. Analysis of generality and specificity of
kinesthetic performance in gross motor skills. Thesis, Louisiana State, 1968.

>

> **GV341.** Preskitt, Donna C. Strength increase as a factor in the
performance of a gymnastic skill. Thesis, North Carolina, 1967.

>

> **GV341.** Ragsdale, Lee Verdell. Contrast of maturity, physical, and
scholastic measures between boys who elect and those who do not elect physical
education in grade eleven. Thesis, Oregon, 1966.

>

> **GV341.** Richarz, Wilbert Harold. The relationship of physical performance
at the United States Air Force Academy to subsequent officer performance.
Thesis, Oregon, 1969.

>

> **GV341.** Scott, Jimmy Dan. The effect of isometric and elastic cord
exercises on strength and speed of swimming. Thesis, Missouri, 1967.

>

> **GV341.** Sloan, Richard Hendricks. An analysis of 1965 off-season training
regimens of Big Ten swimmers. Thesis, Illinois, 1966.

>

> **GV341.** Sloane, Robert Lindley. Predicting athletic success at the United
States Military Academy. Thesis, Wisconsin, 1969.

>

> **GV341.** Smoll, Frank Louis. The influence of physical growth and muscular
strength upon motor performance: within and between year observations. Thesis,
Wisconsin, 1966.

>

> **GV341.** Straub, William Frederick. The effect of overload training
procedures upon the velocity and accuracy of the overarm throw. Thesis,
Wisconsin, 1966.

>

> **GV341.** Sucec, Anthony Arnold. The effects of preliminary exercise on
endurance performance. Thesis, UCB, 1967.

>

> **GV341.** Sweeting, Roger L. Effects of various running and weight training
programs on sprinting speed. Thesis, Penn State, 1963.

>

> **GV341.** Thoden, James Stewart. An investigation of overarm throwing
accuracy before and after heavy and severe treadmill exercise. Thesis,
Wisconsin, 1966.

>

> **GV341.** Thomas, James Carl. Relationships between body size, proportion
and composition variables and standing broad jump and pull-up performances.
Thesis, Springfield College, 1970.

>

> **GV341.** Undlin, Marvin G. A comparison of four methods of circuit
training. Thesis, WSU, 1965.

>

> **GV341.** Van Rossen, Donald Peter. The effects of diversions on repetitive
swimming performance. Thesis, Illinois, 1968.

>

> **GV341.** Van Tine, Harold Curtis. The use of pegboards as a means of
developing arm strength. Thesis, WSU, 1965.

>

> **GV341.** Waddle, Benjamin. A study comparing the effectiveness of a
training program utilizing the Exer-genie with two conventional training
programs on the development of muscular strength and cardiovascular endurance.
Thesis, Florida State, 1967.

>

> **GV341.** Wilkinson, Robert E. Effect of motivational conditions upon the
muscular performance of boys of different age levels. Thesis, Springfield
College, 1965.

>

> **GV341.** Williams, Clayton. The effects of weight training upon vertical
jumping ability. Thesis, Kansas State, 1965.

>

> **GV341.** Winningham, Sam Neil. Effect of training with ankle weights on
running skill. Thesis, USC, 1966.

>

> **GV341.** Wissel, Harold R. The effects of three physical conditioning
programs for junior high school basketball players. Thesis, Springfield
College, 1970.

>

> **GV342.** Ballou, Ralph Burton. An anlaysis of the writings of selected
Church Fathers to A.D. 394 to reveal attitudes regarding physical activity.
Thesis, Oregon, 1965.

>

> **GV342.** Banks, Gary Chester. The philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche as a
foundation for physical education. Thesis, Wisconsin, 1966.

>

> **GV342.** Edmondson, Cornelia. A continuum of thought on the value of
health, physical education, and recreation from the time of John Locke through
the early twentieth century. 1966.

>

> **GV342.** Gerber, Ellen W. Three interpretations of the role of physical
education, 1930-1960: Charles Harold McCloy, Jay Bryan Nash and Jesse Feiring
Williams. Thesis, USC, 1966.

>

> **GV342.** Moolenijzer, Nicolaas Johannes. The concept of "natural" in
physical education: Johann Guts Muths-Margarete Streicher. Thesis, USC, 1965.

>

> **GV342.** Paddick, Robert Joseph. The nature and place of a field of
knowledge in physical education. Thesis, Alberta, 1967.

>

> **GV342.** Shadduck, Ione Genevieve. A philosophical base for a physical
education program design. Thesis, Michigan State, 1967.

>

> **GV342.** Sherman, Atara Polonsky. Theoretical foundations of physical
education in the United States : 1886-1930. Thesis, USC, 1965.

>

> **GV342.** Siedentop, Daryl. A theory for programs of physical education in
the schools. Thesis, Indiana U, 1968.

>

> **GV342.** Slater, Morris Bert. An identification and comparison of some
philosophical beliefs in the area of physical education held by elementary
school teachers. Thesis, Oregon, 1966.

>

> **GV342.** Slatton, Yvonne L. The philosophical beliefs of undergraduate and
graduate physical education major students and the physical education faculty
at the University of North Carolina at Greensboro. Thesis, North Carolina,
1964.

>

> **GV342.** VanderZwaag, Harold John. Delineation of an essentialistic
philosophy of physical education. Thesis, Michigan, 1962.

>

> **GV343.5.** Case, Robert Lewis. An analysis of the communication structure
of a university administrative and instructional unit. Thesis, Illinois, 1969.

>

> **GV343.5.** Dannehl, Wayne Edward. The organizational climate in physical
education administration units in selected miwestern universities. Thesis,
Illinois, 1970.

>

> **GV343.5.** Hansan, John Francis. A job analysis of secondary school men
physical education administrators. Thesis, Oregon, 1969.

>

> **GV343.5.** Olafson, Gordon Albert Alexander. Leader behavior of junior
college and university physical education administrators. Thesis, Illinois,
1969.

>

> **GV343.5.** Paton, Garth Alan. An analysis of administrative theory in
selected graduate administration courses in physical education. Thesis,
Illinois, 1970.

>

> **GV343.5.** Penny, William John. An analysis of the meanings attached to
selected concepts in administrative theory. Thesis, Illinois, 1968.

>

> **GV343.5.** Wesener, Arthur A. Job analysis of supervisors of elementary
school physical education in Wisconsin. Thesis, Wisconsin, 1963.

>

> **GV344.** Conant, Richard D. The nature and frequency of injuries occurring
to high school athletes insured through the Oregon School Activities
Association Mutual Benefit Plan from 1965 to 1968. Thesis, Oregon, 1969.

>

> **GV344.** Houston, Robert John. The nature and frequency of injuries
occurring to high school athletes insured through the Oregon School Activities
Association Mutual Benefit Plan from 1957 to 1960. Thesis, Oregon, 1964.

>

> **GV344.** Payan, Jess. An experimental study of the effects of an eight
week preseason weight training conditioning program on athletic injuries
during the 1967 football season at Terra Linda High School, California. 1969.

>

> **GV345.** Carver, Julia. A study of the influence of the philosophy of the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints on physical education in Church
schools. Thesis, Oregon, 1964.

>

> **GV345.** Spence, Dale William. Analysis of selected values in physical
education as identified by professional personnel. Thesis, Louisiana State,
1966.

>

> **GV345.** Wagner, Ann Louise. The concept of physical education in selected
liberal arts colleges. Thesis, Iowa State, 1963.

>

> **GV347.** Forbush, Edward H. A survey to determine the compliance of
National Junior College Athletic Association members to selected statements of
the Dallas code. Thesis, Springfield College, 1968.

>

> **GV347.** Olsen, Albert William. Intercollegiate athletics: current
practices compared with recommended practices. Thesis, Oregon, 1969.

>

> **GV347.** Weatherford, Terry Lynn. A history of the intramural sports
program at the University of Illinois, 1903-1965. Thesis, Illinois, 1966.

>

> **GV357.** Connor, Helen R. A study of the types and numbers of handicapping
conditions of public school students, and of present practices in adapted
physical education in the first and second class public shool districts of
Oregon. Thesis, Oregon, 1965.

>

> **GV357.** Healy, Alfred. A comparison of two methods of weight-training for
children with spastic type of cerebral palsy. Thesis, Iowa State, 1957.

>

> **GV357.** Meditch, Carl. Effectivesness of two methods of weight-training
for children with athetoid type of cerebral palsy. Thesis, Iowa State, 1961.

>

> **GV357.** Peery, Everett David. Group games for orthopedically handicapped
children. Thesis, Oregon, 1961.

>

> **GV361.** Al-Talib, Nizar Majeed. Attitude: consonant or dissonant role
playing with high or low justification. Thesis, Illinois, 1969.

>

> **GV361.** Allsen, Philip E. An evaluation of the physical education program
for men in selected junior colleges. Thesis, Utah, 1965.

>

> **GV361.** Anderson, Richard E. The effect of a physical conditioning
program on body fat and body density. Thesis, Pennsylvania State, 1965.

>

> **GV361.** Aziere, James F. Hypokinesia in physical education. Thesis,
Kansas, 1967.

>

> **GV361.** Bensch, Anne S. Attitudes of high school boys and girls toward
physical education. Thesis, University of Toledo, 1969.

>

> **GV361.** Borcher, William John. An analysis of public opinion in regard to
physical education in public schools. Thesis, Oregon, 1964.

>

> **GV361.** Brooke, John Dennis. The effects of a six week program of circuit
training on the work output speed of muscular response and performance
decrement in boys 13-15 years of age. Thesis, Wisconsin, 1965.

>

> **GV361.** Burnstine, Deidre. An historical and interpretive survey of
attitudes and attitude research in physical education. Thesis, North Carolina
at Greensboro, 1966.

>

> **GV361.** Cable, Donald Lee. Intramural sports courses in selected
institutions of higher education. Thesis, Illinois, 1965.

>

> **GV361.** Callahan, Harold Franklin. The effect of isometric training and
rebound tumbling on performance in the vertical jump. Thesis, Arkansas State
College, 1965.

>

> **GV361.** Couper, Margaret Elena. An analysis of the transfer of horizontal
momentum to a vertical jump. Thesis, Smith College, 1965.

>

> **GV361.** Cross, John A. Attitudes toward physical education of male
students entering the University of Oregon. Thesis, Oregon, 1964.

>

> **GV361.** Daugherty, Burdon R. A discriminative study of boys' physical
education in high schools of the Big Eight Athletic Conference. Thesis,
Central Washington State College, 1969.

>

> **GV361.** Gowan, Geoffrey Russell. Curriculum implications of a physical
activity program for University of Wisconsin faculty males 45-59 years of age.
Thesis, Wisconsin, 1968.

>

> **GV361.** Griffin, Leon Everett. An evaluation of the physical education
programs for men in selected universities. Thesis, Utah, 1966.

>

> **GV361.** Hickman, John Arthur. Social class, attitude toward physical
activity, and the physical activity of selected groups of college students.
Thesis, Wisconsin, 1963.

>

> **GV361.** Jarrett, Lincoln R. A theoretical model for a physical education
curriculum in the middle school. Thesis, FSU, 1969.

>

> **GV361.** Karst, Ralph Roland. The development of standards for potential
achievement in physical education. Thesis, Wisconsin, 1967.

>

> **GV361.** Kidd, Thomas Richard. An evaluation of the Foundations of
Physical Activity course at the University of Oregon. Thesis, Oregon, 1970.

>

> **GV361.** Leathers, Roger K. A study of the relationships between physical
performance and academic achievement of Springfield College students. Thesis,
Springfield College, 1967.

>

> **GV361.** McClellan, Lincoln. An ev

