|

![](../image/headerL2test.gif)

|  |  |  |  |  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
|  | [![](../image/wacicon.gif)](../index.html) |  |  
|  |

  
![](../image/wireq.gif)

|  |  
  
|  |  |  |

Passed in December 1993 by the Faculty Senate and implemented in Fall 1995,
the WI requirement states that:

> **every undergraduate student must complete at least one writing-intensive
course in the major at the 300 level or above.**

Syllabus Statement (Example) | Guidelines for Collaborative Writing | Ongoing
WI Assessment

* * *

**What Makes a Course Writing-Intensive?**

  * Section size is limited to 35 (the Fall 1996 average was 26). 

  * Students are required to submit at least 3500 words of graded writing (about 14 standard double-spaced pages)--drafts, exercises, ungraded logs, etc., are additional. The 3500 words should be divided among two or more assignments. (Option: a single term paper project might be used, but to fulfill this requirement the project should be divided into stages--e.g., proposal, working draft, final draft--that receive feedback.) 

  * Teachers need to devote sufficient class time to instruction in how to complete assignments. (Detailed written assignments are strongly encouraged as part of this instruction.) 

  * On one major project in the course, students submit a draft on which the teacher gives them detailed feedback, and then students submit a revised draft. (Option: courses in which students are graded on regular ( weekly or semi-weekly) short assignments of a very similar nature--e.g., lab reports, proofs, critiques of reading--revision need not be required, though for one or two early assignments it is strongly recommended.) 

**Guidelines on Use of Collaborative Writing Projects in Writing-Intensive
Courses**

In courses designated as Writing Intensive (WI) by the academic units, the
expectation is that each student will produce 3500 words of graded writing.
There may be instances in some disciplinary contexts, however, where
collaborative writing is appropriate. In such cases, students should be
expected to produce at least 3000 words of individual writing in addition to
other writing produced collaboratively in the class. Additionally, if
collaborative writing assignments are incorporated into the course, they
should be designed so that the instructor sees clear evidence of individual
work such as preliminary drafts and editing/annotations from each
collaborator.

**Faculty Senate Motion Passed in May 1997:**

All WI syllabi must contain the following information:

(a) explicit statement that the course "fulfills all or in part the writing-
intensive requirement for the _________ major";

(b) specific description of the assignments/procedures by which the course
fulfills the WI criteria; to wit:

Link to Online Syllabi for WI Courses **(UNDER CONSTRUCTION)**

**Faculty Senate Motion Regarding WI Class Size Passed in April 2002**

Whereas the State Council on Higher Education in Virginia has mandated that
universities must define, assess, and report on students' writing competency
to "various publics with a stake in the quality of Virginia higher education";

Whereas the Board of Visitors has mandated that the new general education
synthesis course must include a component requiring students to demonstrate
satisfactory written presentation skills before a faculty panel;

Whereas workplaces are highly information and communication-dependent
requiring that our graduates, to be competitive, must demonstrate in their
writing that they possess a range of critical literacies;

Whereas George Mason University has one of the most highly diverse student
populations in the country who present their teachers with a variety of
concomitant writing deficiencies;

We move that, in this time of mandated budget cuts, the Faculty Senate
reaffirm the commitment of our faculty to writing across the curriculum by
strongly recommending that current guidelines on class size in writing-
intensive courses be maintained at 35 (or fewer) students. Be it further moved
that the Chair of the Faculty Senate be directed to communicate in writing
this resolve to the Provost, Deans, Directors, and Chairs.

* * *

**Sample (hypothetical) WI Statement on Syllabus**

This course fulfills all/in part the Writing-Intensive requirement in the
_________ major. It does so through the 1000-word paper on _______ due
_______, the 1000-word analytical report due ______, and the 2500-word
research report. The research report will be completed through a
draft/feedback/revision process. The first draft will be due _______; I will
provide commentary on the draft, and the revised draft will be due on _______.
The above sample is not intended as a template, merely as one MINIMAL way of
fulfilling the intent of the Senate motion. As explained above, we expect that
individual teachers and departments will develop unique ways of meeting the
criteria and we encourage faculty to go into more detail than the sample does
in describing the assignments/procedures. ****

* * *

**Ongoing WI Assessment**

WI syllabi were collected and reviewed in 1996 as part of Phase Three
assessment. As a result of that review, the Faculty Senate recommended that
all WI syllabi include a description of how the course fulfills the WI
requirement. Periodic reviews of WI syllabi help the WAC Committee determine
whether there have been changes in the courses designated as WI, whether
faculty are complying with Senate guidelines for working with writers and
writing in WI courses, and whether these guide-lines are being clearly
articulated to students in the syllabus. For WI assessment results, [click
here](../program/assessing/assessing.html).[  
](../program/assessing/phase3-a.html)

|  |  |  |

  
  
  
  
  
|  |



|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  
|  |

**<**[home](../index.html) **>** <[the program](../program/program.html)>
**<**[teaching with writing](../teaching/teaching.html) **>** < **the WI
requirement** >  
  
<[resources for students](../students/students.html)> <[guides in the
disciplines](../guides/guides.html)> <[national
WAC](../national/national.html)>

|  
![](../../UWC_site/image/transparent.gif) |
![](../../UWC_site/image/transparent.gif) |
![](../../UWC_site/image/transparent.gif) |
![](../../UWC_site/image/transparent.gif) |
![](../../UWC_site/image/transparent.gif) |
![](../../UWC_site/image/transparent.gif) |
![](../../UWC_site/image/transparent.gif) |
![](../../UWC_site/image/transparent.gif) |
![](../../UWC_site/image/transparent.gif) |
![](../../UWC_site/image/transparent.gif) |
![](../../UWC_site/image/transparent.gif) |
![](../../UWC_site/image/transparent.gif) |
![](../../UWC_site/image/transparent.gif)

