![](graphics/coma_sky.gif) |  _G_ eorge _M_ ason _U_ niversity  
  
Department of Physics and Astronomy  
  
ASTR 103 - Astronomy  
  
Section 1  
  
Fall Semester 2002  
---|---  
  
* * *

_**Announcements**_  
---  
**_Web Site Topics_**

  * [Syllabus](sylbs103.html)
  * [Assignments](assgn103.html)
  * [Examinations](exams103.html)
  * [Course Notes](cornt103.html)
  * [Astronomy Supplement](CourseNotes/ECText/ectxt103.html)
  * [Reading Resources](refns103.html)
  * [Internet Resources](resrc103.html)
  * [Viewing the Sky](vwsky103.html)
  * [Questions](quest103.html)
  * [Text Web Site](http://www.whfreeman.com/dtu6e/)

|

> **W** elcome to the home page for **Astronomy 103, Section 1** offered by
the [Department of Physics and Astronomy](http://www.physics.gmu.edu/) at
[George Mason University](http://www.gmu.edu/) in Fairfax, Virginia, USA. This
site supports an introductory college-level course in astronomy offered in a
traditional lecture mode. The site contains a [course
syllabus](sylbs103.html), [reading assignments](assgn103.html), [examination
information](exams103.html), and a set of self-study resources [course
notes](cornt103.html), [astronomy supplement
text](CourseNotes/ECText/ectxt103.html), [reading resources](refns103.html),
[internet resources](resrc103.html), [viewing the sky](vwsky103.html), and a
link to the [textbook web site](http://www.whfreeman.com/dtu/). Finally, there
is a link so that [questions or comments](quest103.html) may be submitted to
the instructor.  
  
**Fall Semester 2002**  

> **Class** \- The course meets Tuesdays and Thursdays, from 1:30 to 2:45 PM,
in Room 131, Science  & Technology I.

>

> **Examinations** \- The course exams are scheduled as follows.

>

>>   * **Exam 1: Thursday, September 19, 1:30 to 2:45 PM, Rm 131 S &T; I**

>>   * **Exam 2: Thursday, October 17, 1:30 to 2:45 PM, Rm 131 S &T; I **

>>   * **Exam 3: Thursday, November 14, 1:30 to 2:45 PM, Rm 131 S &T; I **

>>   * **Final Exam: Thursday, December 12, 1:30 to 4:15 PM, Rm 131 S &T; I**

>>

>

> Class average and median along with a histogram of grades can be found on
the following link: [Performance](Exams/sec1_perform_histogram.html).  
  
**Discussion Board**  

> **Required Participation on Discussion Board** \- As part of the
requirements for this course, all students are required to participate in
responding to instructor posted discussion questions. Your activity on the
discussion board will be tallied over the course of the semester in order to
assess what portion of the allotted points for participation you should
receive. The web site for the discussion board is accessed by on the following
site [Discussion Board](http://physics.gmu.edu/opentac/servlet/start/). You
must create an account before you can login the first time. Follow the
instructions on the web site in order to create your account.  
  
**Interesting Astronomy Links**  

  * [Astronomy Picture of the Day](http://antwrp.gsfc.nasa.gov/apod/astropix.html). Each day a different picture and caption having to do with astronomy is displayed on this NASA site. There is also an archive of past pictures.
  * [The Universe Today](http://www.universetoday.com/). This site collects and posts space exploration news from around the internet.
  * [SpaceRef.com](http://www.spaceref.com/). This site like the one above collects and posts space exploration news. Many articles deal with astronomy.
  * [NASA Space Science](http://spacescience.nasa.gov/). The site and its contents are provided by NASA, and the site is considered to be the agency's main site for astronomy, planetary, and solar science missions and programs.
  * [Encyclopedia of Astronomy and Astrophysics](http://www.ency-astro.com/). The most comprehensive reference on astronomy and astrophysics ever published. Comprising more than 2.5 million words, the Encyclopedia is a work of unprecedented scope and quality written by 800 of the world's leading names in astronomy and astrophysics. 
  * [An Astronomy Course for Students Using the Internet](http://darkskyinstitute.org/astronomy.html) This site is provided by Jack C. Troeger and has some interesting information on astronomy for beginning students.
  * [Virtual Solar System ](http://www.nationalgeographic.com/solarsystem/). Provided by National Geographic, this site provides a virtual trip to discover the wonders of our Solar System in a spectacular 3-D environment. Take a flyby tour of the Sun and each planet in its orbit, observe planets and extraterrestrial weather patterns up close, and more.
  * [Ned Wright's Cosmology Tutorial](http://www.astro.ucla.edu/~wright/cosmolog.htm). This site is provided by Professor Edward L. Wright, Astronomy Department, UCLA. The site contains a wide and varied discussion of modern cosmology with some interesting pictures and Java Applets.
  * [Perspectives in Astrobiology](http://science.nasa.gov/headlines/y2001/ast30mar_1.htm?list65669). NASA Science News for March 30, 2001. NATO and NASA are joining forces to host an Advanced Study Institute for astrobiology in Crete, Sept 29-Oct 10, 2001. A diverse group of the world's most prominent scientists will share with students what they have learned lately about life in the Universe.
  * [Dialogue on Science, Ethics and Religion](http://www.aaas.org/spp/dser/). If you are interested in the interface between science, ethics, and religion, you might want to visit this site sponsored by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. Be sure and visit the pages on **Cosmic Questions**.

  
_Lastest Modification to the System: February 12, 2002_  
  
* * *

Home Page  | [ Syllabus ](sylbs103.html) | [ Assignments ](assgn103.html) | [
Examinations ](exams103.html) | [ Course Notes ](cornt103.html)  
---|---|---|---|---  
[ Astronomy Supplement ]( CourseNotes/ECText/ectxt103.html) | [ Reading
Resources ](refns103.html) | [ Internet Resources ](resrc103.html) | [ Sky
View ](vwsky103.html) | [ Questions ](quest103.html)  
  
* * *

(C) 1995, J. C. Evans  
Physics & Astronomy Department, George Mason University  
Maintained by J. C. Evans; jevans@gmu.edu

