    
|
[![](headerL2.gif)](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/composition/index.html)
|  |  |  |  |  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
|  | ![](icon_policies.gif) |  |  
|  |  

  
![](policies_subhead.gif)

|  |  
|  |  |  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


[back to
top](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/composition/Policies/policies.html#top)  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


[back to
top](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/composition/Policies/policies.html#top)  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


[back to
top](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/composition/Policies/policies.html#top)  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


[back to
top](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/composition/Policies/policies.html#top)  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


[back to
top](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/composition/Policies/policies.html#top)  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


[back to
top](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/composition/Policies/policies.html#top)  
    
    
    
    
    
    


[back to
top](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/composition/Policies/policies.html#top)
|

**Commitment to Diversity**  
The English Department of George Mason University affirms cultural diversity.
As a Department, we are committed to the value of human individuality with
respect to race, gender, religion, ethnicity, sexual orientation and class.
Both in the curriculum and in the classroom, we believe that faculty and
students should value and respect diversity.

**Sexual Harassment**  
George Mason University takes sexual harassment seriously. Following EEOC
guidelines, GMU defines sexual harassment to include any unwelcome sexual
advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal and physical conduct of
a sexual nature when submission to such conduct is made an implicit or
explicit term or condition of an individual's academic performance or
employment, or has the purpose or effect of creating an intimidating, hostile
or offensive educational or working environment.

Faculty are all legally responsible for reporting any allegations to the
department chair(s), and the chair(s) are responsible for reporting them to
the University Equity Officer. Faculty may request that the report be kept
confidential and the person reporting it anonymous. [The Health and Wellness
Center ](http://www.gmu.edu/student/hwc/home.html)provides information on both
sexual harassment and [sexual assault](http://www.gmu.edu/facstaff/sexual/).  
    


**Accommodations for Students with Disabilities**  
Students with documented disabilities are legally entitled to certain
accommodations in the classroom. A note on the syllabus reminding students
with disabilities to contact you as soon as possible in the semester will help
these students feel comfortable about such self-identification. Students
requesting such accommodation must present a faculty contact sheet from the
[Disability Resource
Center](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/advising/aboutus.html). This contact
sheet is issued after a process of evaluation which determines the appropriate
accommodations for the student.

If a student self-identifies as having a disability but does not have a
contact sheet, refer that student to the [Disability Resource
Center](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/advising/dsspocbig.html)
(703-993-2474). Referral protects this process from abuse, puts the student in
contact with a support system, and assures that s/he will receive appropriate
accommodation.  


**Syllabus**

The course syllabus is a contract that indicates the expectations teacher have
of the students in their courses. As such, all information should be clearly
delineated and easily accessed. The course syllabus should clearly provide (at
least) the following information:

  * Course number/name/section number/location

  * Teacher's name

  * Office

  * Phone number

  * Email address

  * Text and other expenses

  * Office hours (1 hour per week)

  * Overview of the course and/or course goals

  * Methods of instruction

  * Course requirements/Grading Policy (Percentages, points, etc.)

  * Policy on plagiarism (Department Statement)
  * Policy on Late Assignments

  * Policy on class participation
  * Policy on submission of assignments

  * Policy on Students with disabilities

  * Pertinent dates (add/drop, holidays, etc.)

  * Schedule of assignments and due dates.

Although a description of essay topics and guidelines is not a required part
of the syllabus, it can be included as an appendix.

**Minimum Word Requirements**  
Every general education course in English should require from each student a
minimum of 3500 words that receive comment from the teacher and form a basis
for the final course grade. Required writing should not be limited to one term
paper due at the end of the course but should be distributed between at least
two assignments during the semester. The 3500-word minimum does not include
in-class, uncommented-on and ungraded assignments or drafts that might also be
required, nor does it include assigned journal writing.

**Grading**  
Students in _ENGL100/101_ receive a final grade of A(4), A
(3.67),B+(3.33),B(3.0),B-(2.67),C+(2.33),C(2.0), or NC. These are the only
university courses which have NC (No Credit) as a grade option. A grade of N/C
reflects the philosophy that learning to write in an academic setting is a
developmental process and that some students may require more time in this
development. Since this grade does not appear on the student's transcript or
affect the student's Grade Point Average, the student is not penalized for
requiring additional time to meet the course requirements in ENGL 100/101.
This policy should be explained at the beginning of the course and be sure
that students in ENGL 100/101 have met your course requirements at the level
of C or better before passing them out of ENGL 100/101.

Because of the N/C option in English 100/101 and because of the consecutive
nature of these required composition and literature courses, teachers should
not give students grades of Incomplete (IN) in 100/101. This policy should be
clearly stated in the teacher's syllabus.

Students in the 200-level literature courses receive A(4), A
(3.67),B+(3.33),B(3.0),B-(2.67),C+(2.33),C(2.0), D, or F. A grade is
considered passing. Students in English 302 receive a final grade of A(4),
A-(3.67),B+(3.33),B(3.0),B-(3.67), C+(2.33), C(2.0), D, or F; however,
students must get a or better to complete the 302 requirement.

**Midterm Grade Policy for 100- and 200-level Course**

As of the Spring 2002 semester, faculty teaching 100- or 200-level courses are
required to give midterm grades in these courses. During the seventh week of
the term, teacher will receive grade rosters, which, according to the
Registrar, ¨¬are due exactly eight weeks from the first day of the Fall or
Spring semester.

Following is the English Department's policy statement regarding midterm
grades in ENGL 100, ENGL 101 and ENGL 200s.  Faculty are expected to include
this statement in their course syllabus.  


In ENGL 100, ENGL 101 and ENGL 200s, students receive a midterm letter grade
based on the work of the first seven weeks of the course. The purpose of this
grade is to help students find out how well they are doing in the first half
of the course in order to make any adjustments necessary for success in the
course as a whole. Instructors calculate letter grades based on the completed
course assignments as weighted on the syllabus through the seventh week. The
work in the second half of the semester may be weighted more heavily, and so
the midterm grade is not meant to predict the final course grade. Students may
view their grade online at WebGMU.  


If, as mentioned in this statement, your assignments in the second half of the
course are weighted more heavily than in the first, you should advise students
of this fact and remind them that the midterm grade is not necessarily
predictive of the final grade.

**Information Technology Skills**

ENGL 100/101

The following IT skills will be addressed in all sections of ENGL 100 and ENGL
101.  By the end of the course, students will have demonstrated the ability to
do each of the following skills in each area as listed.

**Email:**

  * Set up email account on gmu.edu
  * Forward email from gmu.edu account to another email account, if applicable
  * Send messages
  * Reply to messages
  * Send/receive and open attachments  


  **Word Processing:**

  * Create, save, and retrieve a document
  * Format document (to include page numbers and reference pages)
  * Revise document (add/delete/reorder text)
  * Print document   


**Research skills:**

  * Articulate an information need 
  * Set up researchable questions
  * Determine keywords based on these questions
  * Understand the basic structure of databases (records and fields)
  * Search online databases Expanded Academic ASAP, Periodical Abstracts, and the Library Catalogue in the GMU Library system by using the Boolean operator AND, truncation, and phrase
  * Retrieve electronically available sources from these databases
  * Evaluate web sources and other databases for credibility and reliability.

**English Department Statement on Plagiarism**

Plagiarism means using the exact words, opinions, or factual information from
another source without giving that source credit. Writers give credit through
the use of accepted documentation styles, such as parenthetical citation,
footnotes, or end notes; a simple listing of books, articles, and websites is
not sufficient. Plagiarism is the equivalent of intellectual robbery and
cannot be tolerated in an academic setting.

Student writers are often confused as to what should be cited. Some think that
only direct quotations need to be credited. While direct quotations do need
citations, so do paraphrases and summaries of opinions or factual information
formerly unknown to the writers or which the writers did not discover
themselves. Exceptions to this include factual information which can be
obtained from a variety of sources, the writers' own insights or findings from
their own field research, (what has been called common knowledge). What
constitutes common knowledge can sometimes be precarious; what is common
knowledge for one audience may be so for another. In such situations, it is
helpful to keep the reader in mind and to think of citations as being "reader
friendly." In other words, writers provide a citation for any piece of
information that they think their readers might want to investigate further.
Not only is this attitude considerate of readers, it will almost certainly
ensure that writers will not be guilty of plagiarism.

>  

[The **George Mason Honor
Code**](http://www.gmu.edu/facstaff/handbook/aD.html)  
offers more detail on plagiarism and its consequences.

|  |  |  | [COMMITMENT TO
DIVERSITY](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/composition/Policies/policies.html#diversity)

[SEXUAL
HARASSMENT](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/composition/Policies/policies.html#sexual)

[ACCOMODATIONS FOR STUDENTS WITH
DISABILITIES](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/composition/Policies/policies.html#disabled)

[SYLLABUS](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/composition/Policies/policies.html#syllabus)

[MINIMUM WORD REQUIREMENTS
](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/composition/Policies/policies.html#word)

[GRADING](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/composition/Policies/policies.html#grading)

[IT
SKILLS](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/composition/Policies/policies.html#Information
Technology)

[ENGLISH DEPARTMENT STATEMENT ON
PLAGIARISM](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/composition/Policies/policies.html#plagiarism)  
    


  
|  |   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  
|  |

[<news &
noteworthy>](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/composition/news/news.html)
**< policies>**[<for
students>](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/composition/students/students.html)
[<](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/composition/faculty/faculty.html)[for
faculty>](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/composition/faculty/faculty.html)
[<](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/composition/welcome/welcome.html)[director's
welcome
>](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/composition/welcome/welcome.html)

|  
![]() | ![]() | ![]() | ![]() | ![]() | ![]() | ![]() | ![]() | ![]() | ![]()
| ![]() | ![]() | ![]()

