Department of African-American Studies  
  
---  
  
  

| [Home](../index.htm) | [|](../Default.htm) | [Newsletter](../newsletter.htm)
| | | [Programs](../programs.htm) | | | [Courses](../courses.htm) | | |
[Faculty](../faculty.htm) | | | [Contact Us](../contact_us.htm) | | | [Site
Map](../site_map.htm)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
* * *  
  
**[Back to Courses](../courses.htm#AAS 2010)**  
  
Course Syllabus

**

_African American Studies 2010  
Introduction to African-American Studies  
Fall, 2000_

**

Instructor: Makungu Mshairi Akinyela, Ph.D.  
Office Hours Mon. and Wed. 11:00 a.m. to 12:30  
3:45 p.m. to 5:00 p.m.  
Office 1 Park Place, South, Room 962  
Telephone 404 651-4948  
aadmma@gsu.edu

**



Course Description

**

This introductory course explores the intellectual and social origins of
African-American Studies. We examine key concepts, themes, and theories of the
discipline.

**

Course Objectives

**

The overall objective of A.A.S. 2010 is to introduce students to fundamental
historical developments that combine to constitute the discipline of African-
American Studies. As an interdisciplinary area of study, African-American
Studies embraces the bodies of knowledge and research methods of several other
disciplines in the humanities and social sciences. An important uniqueness of
African-American Studies is the central position of African-centered
perspectives in the study of the life and customs of Africans in North
America.

Resulting from successful completion of A.A.S. 2010, the student will be able
to:

1\. Explain the historical development of the discipline of African-American
Studies;

2\. Identify the works of major contributors to the growth of the discipline
and cognate areas;

3\. Outline and analyze major issues of the discipline regarding the ten areas
listed under General Themes;

4. Identify facts/basic knowledge of the sociological, psychological, economic and political experiences of African-Americans;

5\. Analyze on the cultural and aesthetic dimensions of African life
experiences in North America; and

6. Contrast and compare elements of the hybrid, ambiguous nature and characteristic of African life in North America.

**

Caveat: All of this is subject to change according to the needs of the class

General Themes

**

A.A.S. 2010 provides a survey of a scholarly tradition that has produced
knowledge about African-Americans in the following areas:

A. Foundations in African-American Studies

B. Significance of African Heritage

C. Sociological Studies

D. Psychological Studies

E. Political and Economic Studies

F. Cultural, literary and Aesthetic Studies

G. Religious Studies

H. Historical Studies and Anthropological Methods

**

Required Text

**

Hayes, Floyd, _A Turbulent Voyage: Readings in African-American Studies

_

Karenga, Maulana, _Introduction to Black Studies



_**

Additional Readings for Some Weeks Will be Made Available on the Internet Web
Site and from handouts.

Attendance Policy

**

Attendance is required. If students accumulate more than three unexcused
absences, the grade for the semester will be lowered one full grade. Students
are expected to be on time. Three tardies equal one unexcused absence. An
early exit from class is equivalent to a tardy.

**

Course Requirements

**

Students will have a variety of learning experiences in **this** course.
Students will be expected to read assigned texts, be prepared to participate
in class discussion, and take notes in class. The student's class
participation grade will be based on 1) attendance 2) attentiveness in class
3) preparedness (have completed the required readings, and possess the texts
and class utensils), and 5) involvement in class discussions.

**

Service Learning

**

African American or Africana studies have traditionally grown out of a
committed relationship between academic studies and community development and
activism. Consequently each student is expected to perform fifteen hours of
community service at designated locations around the Metro area for this
course. You will need to provide me with a letterhead from a supervising
person at the organization describing the work done and the number of hours
worked. You will be expected to complete a pre and post survey on the project,
hand in a completed Student/Agency contract and to complete a two to three
page reflection paper on your experiences.

**

Exams and Testing

**

Students will take examinations in this course based upon the content of
required readings, class discussions and lectures. There will be three exams
throughout the semester. One of these will be a multiple-choice test and two
will be essay exams. If you read, participate in discussions and ask questions
these tests and exams will go well for you. Please take note, spelling,
punctuation, grammar and intelligibility counts! You will be expected to
deliver the best college level work. There will be no make up for missed
exams.





**

Group Project

**

There is no final "exam" for this class. However, students will be expected to
begin forming work groups by the third week of class. These work groups will
be responsible for researching, developing and presenting a multimedia
presentation to the class on one disciplinary area of African American studies
during the final three weeks of the semester. Reporting on the findings of the
group research, students are required to give an oral presentation utilizing
educational media in class. Along with the oral and multi-media presentation,
a jointly produced research paper will be turned in. This paper will include
(1) a review of the development of the discipline; (2) major African
contributors to the discipline researched; (3) major theoretical contributions
to the discipline; (4) an annotated bibliography reviewing major texts and
significant journal articles.

**

Dates for all work during the semester are intended to be flexible and may
change at the prerogative of the instructor and based on learning needs of the
class.



Grading criteria

**

Exams 30%

Test 10%

Group Project 40%

Attendance 10%

Service Learning 10%

**

Extra Credit

**

Two page reflection papers on relevant community events (lectures, programs,
etc.) = 2 %. These do add up and can be useful if you need that little extra
to get a higher final grade.

**

Course Topics

Week 1

**

I. What is African-American Studies?

A. Definition, Objectives and Purpose

Historical and Philosophical Foundations

1\. History of the Discipline

2\. Major Thinkers and Contributors

3\. Significant Organizations and Institutions

4\. Major Concepts and Ideological Trends a. Socialism b. Nationalism c.
Integration d. Feminism/Womanism



Reading: Karenga. Chapter 1;

Hayes, Part l "African American Studies: Trends, Developments, and Future
Challenges", Carter G. Woodson, "The Study of the Negro", Harold Cruse, "The
Integtrationist Ethic as a Basis for Scholarly Endeavors", Hull and Smith,
"The Politics of Black Women's Studies", Manning Marable, "Black Studies,
Multiculturalism and the Future of American Education".

Significance of African Heritage

A. Dark or glorious Past?

B. African Continuities, Myth or Realities

Reading: Karenga, Chapter 1, pp 69 - 108, Hayes, "African Civilizations Before
European Domination", 51-58; Boniface Obichere, "African History and Western
Civilization", Adu Boahen, "The Sudanese States and Empires" in Hayes,

**

Week 3

**

African-American History and Historiography

A. The Historiography of Captivity: Reading: Hayes, pp. 85-144,

Karenga, pp. 115 to 190

**

Week 4

**

Black Sociology

A. The Black Family: Akinyela, Readings for

"Black Families, Cultural Democracy and Self

Determination", Karenga, p. 279 - 297, Reading,

Hayes, Chapter V

**

Week 5

**

Black Psychology

A. White Supremacy and the African Mind

Akinyela, An African Centered Life Cycle Theory", In Hayes, "African
Philosophy: Foundations for Black Psychology" Wade Nobles, "Of our Spiritual
Strivings" DuBois.

**

Week 6

**

Black Politics

Reading: Hayes, Chapter VIII; Karenga, Chapter 5

**

Week 7

**

Black Economics

A. Black Economic Development

Reading: Hayes, Chapter VII, Karenga, Chapter VII; Read Karenga

**

Week 8

**

Black Art and Literature

Reading:; Hayes, 151-232, Karenga, Chapter 7.1,

A. Slave Narratives

B. Harlem Renaissance

C. Black Arts Movement

D. Contemporary

Reading' Hayes, 233-282, Karenga, Chapter 7.4

**

Weeks 9 through 11

**

Religion

A. Christianity

B. Islam

C. African Tradition

Reading:; Maulana Karenga, "Black Religion", Introduction to Black Studies,
211-266; Akinyela, "Black Families, Cultural Democracy and Self
Determination",

**

Week 12

**

Anthropological Methods

Linguistics

Historical Archaeology

Ethnography

Reading: Albert Raboteau, "The Debate" 48-55;

L.D. Turner, "Preface" and "Background",

Africanisms in the Gullah DiaLect

**

Weeks 13 through 15

Presentation of Projects

**



|  |  
**[Back to Courses](../courses.htm#AAS 2010)**

