  
**Academic Teaching Vita of Dr. Mark A. Spikell**

Professor of Education (Mathematics), tenured, 1979 - present  
Graduate School of Education, MS4B3, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA
22030

Phone: 703-993-2042 Fax: 703-993-2013 Email: mspikell@gmu.edu

**Education**

B.A. Mathematics Miami University 1963  
M.Ed. Educational Administration Xavier University 1967 Ed.D.  
Curriculum K-12 (Mathematics) Boston University 1972  
Cert. Institute for Higher Education University of Texas System 1981

**Recent Honors  ** _TEACHING_

o 1995 Received the Teaching Excellence Award, George Mason University

o 1993 Nominated (by GMU) for the Outstanding Faculty Award, Virginia State
Council on    Higher Education

o 1990 Received the William C. Lowry Outstanding Mathematics Teacher at the
College    Level Award, Virginia Council Teachers of Mathematics

**Recent Honors   ** _RESEARCH_

o 1994 Received a Faculty Research Study Leave Award, George Mason University

**Recent Honors   ** _LEADERSHIP_

o 1995 Nominated for Board of Directors Election, National Council of Teachers
of     Mathematics

o 1992 Selected as the First Faculty Intern, Provost's Office, George Mason
University

o 1989 Runner-up Business Advocate of the Year Award, Fairfax County Chamber
of    Commerce, for Work in George Mason University's Entrepreneurship Center

**Selected Recent Teaching, Curriculum and Program Development Experience**

   A. _Current primary teaching interests and expertise:_

1\. using manipulatives such as Fraction Bars, Attribute Blocks, Geoboards,
Hundreds Boards, Color Cubes, Polydrons, Multibase Blocks, Algebra Tiles and
Cuisenaire Rods to teach mathematical ideas, concepts, principles and skills,

2\. using new technologies, e.g., the Internet and World Wide Webb, scientific
and graphing calculators, to teach communication and research skills, problem
solving and mathematics,

3\. using a guided discovery, workshop, laboratory method for teaching
mathematics,

4\. promoting the Polya and Scientific Method models of problem solving for
use in school based mathematics instruction,

5\. implementing alternative assessment techniques for evaluating non-routine
mathematical problem solving,

6\. developing and classifying non-routine mathematics problems appropriate
for use in the K-12 school curriculum,

7\. promoting National Council Teachers of Mathematics Curriculum standards,
particularly the core standards of problem solving, communications, reasoning
and connections,

8\. designing models and academic programs for preparing elementary and middle
school teachers to be specialists, resource teachers, and curriculum/ staff
development leaders.

   B. _Recent and current assignments:_

1\. teaching master and doctoral graduate courses in Mathematics Education
such as:

EDCI 609 Problem Solving in Mathematics in Middle Education  
EDCI 572 Teaching Mathematics in the Secondary School  
EDSE 553 Teaching Mathematics to Special Needs Populations  
EDCI 604 Current Trends and Topics in Mathematics Education  
EDCI 666 Teaching Mathematics in The Elementary School  
EDUC 895 Trends and Topics in Mathematics Education Leadership

2\. supervising independent studies in mathematics education;

3\. serving on doctoral committees in mathematics education or instructional
uses of technology;

4\. supervising all adjunct instructors of math methods courses;

5\. developing and coordinating the innovative cohort track in the Ph.D. in
Education degree for Mathematics and Science Education Leaders and Staff
Development Personnel at central office or building levels;

6\. developing and coordinating the innovative cohort track in the M.Ed.
degree in Educational Leadership for school Math/Science Master Teachers.

**Administrative and Other Program Development Experience in Virginia**

A. Professor-In-Charge (Coordinator), Ph.D. and M.Ed. Educational Leadership
Programs in Mathematics and Science Education, George Mason University, 1995 -
present.

B. Co-founder, George Mason University Entrepreneurship Center, GMU Special
Assignment, School of Business Administration, 1986-1987.

C. President, Annographics, Inc., an R&D technology company in the dynamic
character recognition field, 1983- 1987. [This was a special assignment in the
Institute of Information Technology at George Mason University.]

D. Chairman of the Department of Education, George Mason University,
1979-1982. Served as chief academic, administrative, and personnel officer in
a department with 36 full and 15 part time faculty, 16 support staff, 490
undergraduate and 505 graduate students in 3 bachelor, 6 master and 1 doctoral
degree program.

**Professional Experience Prior to Arriving in Virginia**

From 1964 to 1979, held the following teaching and administrative positions.

(1) At Lesley College, Cambridge, MA, taught mathematics and coordinated
mathematics education programs.

(2) At Cincinnati Country Day School taught mathematics (grades 7-12) and
chaired the mathematics department.

(3) At Indian Hill (Ohio) Middle School and

(4) Boone County (Kentucky) Junior High, taught mathematics and a self
contained grade 5 class.

**Scholarship and Publications**

**Doctoral Dissertation**

"A Development of Analytic Methods and Techniques For Sketching The Graphs of
Factorable Polynomial and Rational Functions Without The Use of Calculus."
Boston University. 1972.

**Selected Published Books**

Teaching Mathematics with Manipulatives. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon,
1993.

Mathematical Problem Solving with the Microcomputer. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall, Inc., 1982, with S. Snover.

Programming the TI 55 Slide Rule Calculator. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall, Inc., 1982, with S. Snover.

Brain Ticklers--Puzzles and Pastimes for Programmable Calculators and Personal
Computers. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, Inc, 1981, with S. Snover.
(Japanese & Portuguese editions, 1983).

How To Program Your Programmable Calculator. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall, Inc., 1979, with S. Snover.

Problem Solving In The Mathematics Laboratory. Boston, MA: Prindle Weber,
Schmidt, Inc., 1972, with C. Greenes and R. Willcutt.

**Selected Published Curriculum Books and Materials**

Dr. Super's Triangles: Algebra Explorations. Mountain View, CA: Creative
Publications, Inc., 1995, with B. Aghevli.

Dr. Super's Triangles: Fraction Explorations. Mountain View, CA: Creative
Publications, Inc., 1995, with B. Aghevli.

Dr. Super's Triangles: Symmetry Explorations. Mountain View, CA: Creative
Publications, Inc., 1995, with B. Aghevli.

Triango! A Guide To Strategy Exploration. Mountain View, Palo Alto, CA:
Creative Publications, Inc., 1994, with B. Aghevli.

Computer Worksheets. Heath Elementary Mathematics Program, Grades 5-8. Boston,
MA: D.C. Heath and Company, 1983, with S. Snover.

Computer Activities. Algebra, Structure, and Method Book I. Boston, MA:
Houghton Mifflin Company, 1981, with S. Snover.

Multibase Activities -- Base 10, Base 5, Base 4. Palo Alto, CA: Creative
Publications, Inc., 1974, with C. Greenes and R. Willcutt.

**Selected Major Published Software Programs**

Pick The Numbers. Apple II+ and IIe. Boston, MA: D.C. Heath and Company, 1984
w S. Snover.

Brain Ticklers and Mathematical Problem Solving with the Microcomputer. Apple
II+ and IIe, VIC 20, and Timex Sinclair 1000. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall, Inc., 1983, w S. Snover.

**Selected Published Refereed Articles**

"Problem Solving with Solid Squares." The New York State Mathematics Teachers'
Journal. Vol. 42, No. 3, 1992: 151-156.

"Exploring Mathematical Problem Solving Using Cuisenaire Rods" Illinois
Mathematics Teacher. Vol. 43, No. 1, 1992: 32-41.

"Equilateral Triangles on An Isometric Grid." Mathematics Teacher. Vol. 83,
December, 1990: 740-743.

"Teaching Problem Solving in the Early Grades." Implementing the Mathematics
Standards. (B. Underhill, Ed.). Monograph No. 1, Fall 1989. Virginia Council
Teachers of Mathematics.

"Problem Solving and Programming --The License Plate Curiosity," Mathematics
Teacher Vol. 74, November 1981: 616-618 with S. Snover.

"Calculator Programs in General Genetics: III Latter's Indices of
Heterozygosity, Population Differentiation, and Genetic Distance," Journal of
Heredity Vol 71, 1980: 293-294. w Blumenberg.

"Coloring Arguments, Number Theory Conditions and Impossibility Proofs,"
Illinois Mathematics Teacher Vol 30, 1979: 2-12 w S. Snover.

"Generally, How Do You Solve Equations," Mathematics Teacher Vol. 72, May,
1979: 326-336 with S. Snover.

"The Role of Programmable Calculators and Computers in Mathematical Proofs,"
Mathematics Teacher Vol. 71, December, 1978: 745-750 w S. Snover.

**Selected Books and Software Edited**

Mapmaker. John Richards. Educational game for social studies. Apple and IBM PC
versions. Boston, MA: D.C. Heath and Company, (1985).

Maze-o. Joan Isenberg. Educational game for language arts. Apple II+ and IIe
versions. Boston, MA: D.C. Heath and Company, 1985.

Notebook Filer. Brian Crouch. Educational data management system. Apple and
IBM PC versions. Boston, MA: D.C. Heath and Company, 1984.

Microcomputers -- A Parents' Guide. Kenneth P. Goldberg and Robert D.
Sherwood. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1983.

A Parents' Guide to Television -- Making the Most of It. Michael R. Kelley.
New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1983.

Programmable Clculators -- Implications for the Mathematics Curriculum.
Columbus, OH. ERIC Clearinghouse for Science, Mathematics and Environmental
Education, Ohio State University, 1980.

Problem Solving In School Mathematics. 1980 Yearbook of NCTM (S. Krulik, Ed.)
Reston, VA: The Council. (member of editorial board)

**Selected Presentations From Over 70 Given At Professional Meetings**

"Teaching Non Routine Problem Solving." Eastern Regional Conference. National
Council Teachers of Mathematics. Baltimore, MD. October 10-12, 1996\.

"A Hands-on Approach to Teaching Algebra and Other Topics with a New
Manipulative, the Triangles Kit." 28th Annual Meeting. National Council
Supervisors of Mathematics. San Diego, CA. April 21-24, 1996. with B. Aghevli.

"Innovative Leadership Programs for Mathematics and Science Education. 27th
Annual Meeting." National Council Supervisors of Mathematics. Boston, MA.
April 4-5, 1995.

"Conversations with Lead Teacher Institute Staff." 3rd Annual VQUEST (Virginia
Quality Education in Sciences and Technology ) Conference. Richmond, VA.
January 28-29, 1995.

"A Rationale for the NCTM Standards -- A Different Slant on Problem Solving."
Keynote Address. Rappahannock Region Association Teachers of Mathematics,
Fredericksburg, VA, April 19, 1994.

"Changing Nature of Middle School Methods Courses - Syllabus Swap." Teacher
Education Workshop. 72nd Annual Meeting. National Council Teachers of
Mathematics. Indianapolis, IN. April, 13-16, 1994.

"Critical Thinking and Strategy Game Analysis: Explorations with Triangoes."
Southern Regional Conference. National Council Teachers of Mathematics,
Richmond, VA. February 24-26, 1994.

"Promoting the Standards of Communications, Reasoning, and Connections by
Problem Solving." Elementary (3-5) Session. Western Regional Conference.
National Council Teachers of Mathematics. Durango, CO. October 28-30, 1993.

"Panel Discussion: Can We Change Teacher Education to Reflect the Standards?"
with E. Nichols, et. al. General Interest Session. 71st Annual Meeting.
National Council Teachers of Mathematics. Seattle, WA. March 31 - April 3,
1993.

"Critical Issues for Teacher Educators -- the Professional Standards for
Teaching Mathematics." Teacher Education Session. 69th Annual Meeting.
National Council Teachers of Mathematics. New Orleans, LA. April 17-20, 1991.

"Problem Solving with Cubes." Annual Meeting. Virginia Council Teachers of
Mathematics. Roanoke, VA. March, 1991.

"Critical Issues Confronting Mathematics Educators in Implementing the New
Standards." Teacher Education Joint Session. 68th Annual Meeting. National
Council Teachers of Mathematics/22nd Annual Meeting. National Council
Supervisors of Mathematic. Salt Lake City, UT April 16-18, 1990.

**Selected Recent Grant Activities**

"Topics in Algebra for Today's Mathematics Teachers" (Sponsored by the
Virginia Mathematics and Science Coalition). Co-Project Director (with K.
Fischer and S. Critchfield). Virginia Council of Higher Education, 1991 Dwight
D. Eisenhower Mathematics and Science Education Act Program. Submitted Spring,
1997, $74,096.

"Algebra for Today's Middle School Teacher." Co-Project Director (with K.
Fischer and S. Critchfield. Virginia Council of Higher Education, 1991 Dwight
D. Eisenhower Mathematics and Science Education Act Program. Awarded, Spring
1996, $70,200.

"Virginia Collaborative for Mathematics and Pedagogy." Project Director and
Principle Investigator. National Science Foundation. State Systemmic
Initiative Grants. Teacher Preparation Program, ID #TPE-9255774, $9,999,926.
Submitted May 1992. Unfunded.

"Mathematics and Science Lead Teachers in the Elementary and Middle Schools."
Co-Project Director (with R. Farley and S. Critchfield) Virginia Council of
Higher Education, 1991 Dwight D. Eisenhower Mathematics and Science Education
Act Program. Awarded, Spring 1992, $67,314.

"Development of a Mathematics Content Course for Middle School Teachers." Co-
Project Director, (w K. Fischer) Virginia Council of Higher Education, 1991
Dwight D. Eisenhower Mathematics and Science Education Act Program. Awarded,
Spring 1992, $42,547.

"Elementary Gifted/Talented Mathematics Project Dissemination." Co-Project
Director, Title II, Education for Economic Security Act, Virginia State
Council on Higher Education. Awarded. 1989, $24,190.

"Planning and Implementation of the George Mason University Entrepreneurship
Center." Co-Project Director. $312,983. Awarded. 1986 from these sources:
Virginia Center For Innovative Technology ($110,000), the U.S. Small Business
Administration ($107,983) and 20 corporations in the metropolitan Washington
area ($93,000)

**Selected Recent Professional Major Service and Leadership Activities**

Memberships:

National Council Teachers of Mathematics, Association of Mathematics Teacher
Educators, National Council Supervisors of Mathematics, Virginia Council
Teachers of Mathematics, Virginia Council for Supervision of Mathematics,
Northern Virginia Council Teachers of Mathematics

1\. Association of Mathematics Teacher Educators (AMTE), Past President AMTE
is a new national association founded in the late 1980s in collaboration with
the National Council Teachers of Mathematics and the Mathematical Association
of America. AMTE provides a forum and programs for the professional growth of
college professors who design and teach mathematics education courses,
programs and degrees for preservice and inservice teachers.

2\. Member, Steering Committee, Lead Teacher Component, VQUEST, Virginia's
five-year (1992-96) $10,000,000 National Science Foundation Funded State
Systemic Initiative Grant. VQUEST is a major state effort to change and
improve the teaching of mathematics and science in schools and colleges. The
Lead Teacher Component is the major initiative of VQUEST. The goal over 5
years is to train nearly 1400 educators as lead teachers, one in mathematics
and one in science for every elementary and middle school in the state. As
lead teachers, these professionals will assist teachers in their schools with
math and science instruction. The 6 person Steering Committee sets policy for
the component, supervises and approves development of the Lead Teacher
Institute curriculum, identifies and employs the faculty, evaluates the
program and actively participates as teaching members of the Institute.

3\. Referee, Mathematics Teacher, the journal of the National Council Teachers
of Mathematics devoted to issues in the teaching of mathematics at the
secondary and college teacher education levels.

4\. Regional CoDirector, Virginia Mathematics Coalition, a statewide effort by
leaders of business, government and education to promote improved mathematics
and science education, established under a grant from the Exxon Foundation and
the Mathematical Sciences Education Board.

5\. Member, Board of Directors, Four Year College and University
Representative, Virginia Council Teachers of Mathematics, Virginia's primary
statewide professional association dedicated to promoting the improvement of
mathematics instruction grades (K-14).

6\. Member, Program Committee, Southeastern Regional Meeting, National Council
Teachers of Mathematics, Richmond, Virginia, February 24-26, 1994. The Council
offers 8 regional meetings a year and 2500 persons are expected to attend the
nearly 400 sessions at this meeting. Selected

**Recent George Mason University Major Service and Leadership Activities**

1\. Senator, Faculty Senate, the body charged with representing the academic
and professional interests of the general faculty, elected by the faculty of
the Graduate School of Education.

2\. Chairman, Facilities and Support Services Committee, one of 4 Faculty
Senate Permanent Committees, elected by Senators.

3\. Member, Faculty Senate Executive Committee, the body that meets regularly
with the Provost of the University and handles the business of the General
Faculty when the Senate is not in session.

4\. Member, University Faculty Handbook Committee. The Committee, established
in January, 1992, by the President of the University, consisted of 3 persons
appointed by the President, 3 elected by the Senate, and a Chair. The
Committee's task, completed fall, 1993, was to revise the handbook governing
GMU's faculty.

5\. Chairman, Parking Services Advisory and Appeals Committee The Committee of
6 faculty and staff members advises the Associate Vice President for
Operational Services on policy and operational matters relating to parking
services and campus access. It also serves as the body hearing appeals for
citations issued on campus to faculty, staff, and visitors. The Committee is
appointed by the Associate Vice President and the Chair is elected by the
membership.

6\. Cofounder, University Entrepreneurship Center (the Center) The Center,
founded in 1986-87 in the School of Bu*siness Administration, exists to foster
the growth and development of early stage companies in Northern Virginia. I
continue to serve as an active advisor to Center staff and incubator
companies; to lecture in the Small Business Development Center on
entrepreneurship and venture capital; and to be an associate member of the
Century Club (one of only three and the only GMU faculty member so honored),
the group of over 75 companies who support the entrepreneurial and related
academic programs of the University.

7\. Member, Small Business Institute Faculty, Management Department, School of
Business Administration. The Small Business Institute is the mechanism by
which the University offers academic coursework and programs in
entrepreneurship at both the undergraduate and graduate levels. Programs of
the SBI are offered through the management department and the faculty is
augmented by a network of practicing professionals from the business
community.

**[return to the previous page](http://mason.gmu.edu/~mspikell)**

