SEXUALITY AND THE LAW Possible Syllabus for SEXUALITY AND THE LAW - an upper
division undergraduate course. (Added to WMST-L March 1995) Comments welcome.
For legal and political reasons, I may not be able to teach this course at
NCSU, but it having the syllabus in the archive might provoke some useful
discussion. David F. Austin Associate Professor of Philosophy Department of
Philosophy and Religion Box 8103 NCSU Raleigh, NC 27695-8103
david_austin@ncsu.edu Preliminary remarks: I believe that this course would
not be worth doing unless students became familiar with the materials that the
debates are about; verbal descriptions of the materials would be inadequate.
This entails students' viewing sexually explicit videos that, it has been
argued, are not Dworkin/MacKinnon-pornographic and viewing sexually explicit
videos that, it has been argued, are Dworkin/MacKinnon-pornographic. Given my
current understanding of the relevant issues, I'd not want on the books any
law that would preclude such fully informed debate about itself; nor would I
want a law on the books (like, e.g., most current obscenity laws) that is less
than clear about the permissibility of such debate. Although my department,
University Office of Legal Affairs, Sexual Harassment Prevention Officer and
Provost have been supportive, I don't know whether it'll ever be feasible to
teach a course here that uses pornographic or obscene material. The legal
situation is murky, since NC obscenity statutes were amended in 1985 (under
the direction of attorney H. Robert Showers, Jr., then of the Meese Justice
Department, and over the strong protests of educators, librarians and
therapists) to remove an exemption based on (otherwise obscene) materials'
educational value. (The law was also made stricter in other ways.) I am also
concerned about the application of sexual harassment law, even if the course
described were team- taught (in the way indicated in the enclosed) with
female, feminist faculty; the relevant Title IX case law is meager at best.
Legal issues aside, there is the question of how reactions to the course would
affect university funding at all levels; the university budget is controlled
by the same (sort of) legislators who strengthened the obscenity law in 1985,
just one year ago refused to decriminalize consensual, not-for-money,
heterosexual, oral sex, even in marriage (it's still a felony in NC, and the
law's been used in recent memory against unmarrieds), and just last summer
considered a bill that would have banned teachers from talking about unlawful
sex acts, thus prohibiting classroom talk about oral sex, sodomy and
bestiality. I've spoken with a respected, well-known psychologist whose
specialties are research on sexual trauma and therapy with trauma survivors,
and who has shown some sexually explicit material in courses that she teaches.
She tells me that viewing such material has triggered memories of abuse in
some of her students; most, but not all, of the students were female, and some
also had nonabusive sexual experiences between the time of abuse and the
triggering of the memories. She remarked that, as long as appropriate
therapeutic help is provided (not by the instructor), it may not be wholly
unfortunate to have such memories triggered in this relatively safe and
supportive context. This psychologist's view is that viewing 'violent
pornography' is on a par with viewing Holocaust films and other material
depicting severe trauma: all of it is typically very disturbing; but it is
important to include it in courses on psychological trauma. Her students
agree, as do other trauma specialists I've consulted. Two female faculty (at
other universities) who have taught courses on pornography suggest that a
detailed syllabus is 'fair notice', and that a separate consent form is
unnecessary, just as it is unnecessary in courses discussing creationism, the
Holocaust, etc. Attorneys with relevant experience have advised me that a
separate consent form [containing the "Guidelines for Students Enrolled in
This Course" (see sample syllabus, below) and extremely detailed description
of the materials] would not be necessary; a detailed syllabus, reviewed early
in the course, would suffice.1 To help guard against the development of a
'hostile learning environment', the "Guidelines for Students Enrolled in This
Course" [see below] would be reviewed during the first class meeting; and the
course would be team-taught with two female colleagues, one a philosopher of
law who has worked on feminist legal theory, and the other a film theorist who
specializes in the representation of women in film. The reading and viewing
lists need much work; additions and deletions need to be made. Several people
who work to help prostitutes have reviewed this draft and strongly recommended
increased attention to the laws regulating sexual behavior (as well as
explicit representations of the behavior). This is a good recommendation,
though I'm not yet sure just how to implement it. It has also been suggested
that, despite the law-based reasons for doing so, grouping homosexual and
child pornography together in the same section of the course may convey an
unintended message. Draft Sample Syllabus for a Seminar not now taught or even
proposed Sexuality and the law M 2:00-5:00 W 19:00-21:30 We'll investigate the
politics of sexuality by focusing on laws, actual and proposed, for the
regulation of sexually explicit representations. To guide us, we'll consider
the hypothesis that one of the greatest mysteries about sex is that it's
mysterious, because there is no significant moral difference between how we
ought to conduct our sexual practices and our food-consumption.2
Prerequisites: Two courses in relevant fields at junior- level, and
instructors' permission; enrollment limited to 15 students. Course Format: One
seminar meeting each week, and one viewing session each week. (If a session is
held late in the day, escort service is provided on request by Campus Public
Safety.) The course carries 4 hours of credit (25% more than for a standard
one-semester course). How to Get a Grade: (i) 750-1000 word paper for each of
parts II, III, IV and V of course; due by the end of each part; topics
suggested by instructors (40% of grade); (ii) 1250 word paper (20% of grade)
on lessons learned from 'mock jury' determinations on selected material (for
the "fourth" credit): for each item studied (or a specified subset, depending
on time constraints), all fifteen seminar members (12 jurors, and three
alternates) will apply (a) the US Supreme Court Miller standard; (b) NC state
obscenity law; and (c) the MacKinnon/Dworkin model ordinance to determine if
the material is obscene [(a), (b)], pornographic [(c)] or 'merely' erotica
[neither obscene nor pornographic]. A worksheet specific to each standard will
be supplied. Time permitting, some items may be viewed and evaluated a second
time at the course's end. If feasible, a mock trial will be held for some
material, if cooperating attorneys can be found. (iii) Final project-3000+
words (40% of grade): Propose and argue for a model statute regulating pornog-
raphy; or argue, on either practical or theoretical grounds, that such a
statute is undesirable. Collaborative efforts may be undertaken only with the
instructors' permission; everyone in the group will receive the same grade.
How to Get an Even Better Grade: If your course grade is on a borderline, you
may boost it into the higher range by providing well-written, well-argued
250-500 word reviews of any three of the films viewed in the course.
Guidelines for Students Enrolled in This Course:3 The sort of material that we
will be viewing can elicit strong re- sponses; among common responses are
amusement, anger, anxiety, arousal, boredom, disgust, embarrassment, sadness
\- any of which may be accompanied by characteristic physical reactions. (Some
instructors' experiences suggest that arousal is far less common than might be
expected, perhaps because of the group setting for viewing and the analytical
approach taken towards the material. There have also been reports that viewing
this sort of material can cause 'buried' memories to surface, some of these
memories of abuse.) These responses and reactions can serve as data for class
investigations. It is therefore important for us to work to make this
classroom a safe place for students to share experiences, feelings, and ideas.
Here are some rules to help us. Students may propose new rules or amendments
to these rules if they wish. +There will be no interruption of any student by
another. The instructors will moderate all discussion and invite the next
comment when the current speaker is finished. +There will be no personal
criticism of any kind directed by any member of the class to any other member
of the class. You are entitled to comment on the intellectual content of
another student's words, to contribute your own feelings and thoughts to the
discussion, and to pose questions to other students, but you are not entitled
to tell your peers that they are "crazy," "perverted," "stupid," "sexist," or
anything else of this nature. Treat peers with respect and kindness. This
includes treating any silences with respect, as well. Of course, none of this
precludes exercising one's sense of humor, but it should be done with
appropriate care. +Some students may choose to give accounts in class of their
personal experiences, though no one will ever be re- quired to do so. These
accounts are welcome in this class if and only if they relate directly to the
discussion. Since they are true accounts, students in this class should
respect others' privacy and observe the rules of confidentiality--if you tell
someone else's stories outside of class, please omit the student's name and
any other identifying features. No one may tape any session of the course for
any purpose. +This class is not a therapy session, and no instructor can serve
as any student's therapist. Feelings and personal experience may be introduced
into discussions if and only if they contribute to the class's understanding
of the par- ticular topic under discussion. Students who wish to explore the
option of therapy may speak with any instructor privately for a list of on-
and off-campus resources. +Some students may find it necessary to take an
occasional 'breather' during class; they should feel free to stand up and walk
out of class if they find themselves in need of a short break. It's OK to ask
a classmate to accompany you during such a break. +One ideal for discussion
will be defined by Feldman's Reason and Argument. Although the ideal may not
always be attained, we will aim for it. Participation in Studies: You may be
invited to participate in one or more academic studies on the effects that
taking this course has on your attitudes. Any such study would have been
reviewed and approved by the University Committee on the Use of Human
Subjects. Participation would in any case be strictly voluntary and is not a
course requirement. If you did choose to participate, any study may be
discussed in one of your shorter required course pa- pers [see (i), in How to
Get a Grade, above]. Texts: Required: Feminist Anti-Censorship Task Force
(FACT), Caught Looking, $15.95 [This contains B&W; pornographic pictorials,
and some historically important essays arguing against MacKinnon/Dworkin
ordinances.] Catharine MacKinnon, Only Words (Harvard University Press, 1993),
$14.95 Sexuality and the Law CoursePak, <$30.00 (collection of articles; see
outline below) Richard Feldman, Reason and Argument (Prentice Hall, 1993),
$22.95 Recommended only: Robert Stoller and I. S. Singer, Coming Attractions:
The Making of an X-Rated Movie (Yale University Press, 1993), $30.00 [-an
ethnographic study of the making of the pornographic video Stairway to
Paradise] Diana E. H. Russell, Against Pornography: the Evidence of Harm
(Russell Books, 1994), $12.95 [-contains B&W; pictorial pornography, and an
extended argument, based on social scientific studies, that pornography, as
distinguished from erotica, is harmful] Catharine MacKinnon, Feminism
Unmodified (Harvard University Press, 1987) $13.95 Marcia Pally, Sex and
Sensibility: Relections on =46orbidden Mirrors and the Will to Censor (Ecco
Press, 1994), $11.00 [-a summary of some common arguments against censorship,
current obscenity laws, and MacKinnon/Dworkin ordinances] \- all available at
the University Bookstore approximate COURSE SCHEDULE AND REQUIRED READINGS
(viewing material to be selected from appended list) Week 1: Viewing: Sexually
Explicit Anti-Pornography, Pornography in the Making ('Meta-Porn') I.
Introduction and Preliminaries A. Hello B. Review of Syllabus, including
discussion of Guidelines C. Anonymous Survey of Beliefs and (Mis)information
(including the Kinsey Institute 'quiz' on American sexual habits and
attitudes) (Be sure to keep a copy of your own responses. We'll repeat the
survey at semester's end.) D. Methodological Preliminaries: 1\. Hypothesis:
One of the greatest mysteries about sex is that it's mysterious, because
there's no significant moral difference between how we ought to conduct our
sexual practices and our food- consumption. (Gayle Rubin, "Thinking Sex,"
selection from Tania Modleski, Feminism without Women) 2\. The 'Martian' view
of sex and eating (-revulsion at public displays of nutrient consumption and
bafflement at the moral mystique of procreation and sex-for-fun) 3\. A
'working' definition of "pornography" (Donald VanDeVeer, "Pornography,"
Encyclopedia of Ethics)4 4\. A Dialectical Ideal (Feldman, Reason and
Argument) Weeks 2 and 3: Viewing: Sex Education for Adults, Food and Sex II.
Sex, the Unknown In this part of the course, we investigate how attitudes
towards sex have affected attempts to discover information about sex,
information that is needed for evaluating various legislative proposals. In
line with our hypothesis, we will consider parallel questions about food,
alcohol and drug consumption. A. Sex: physiological and anatomical 'facts' 1\.
The 'G-spot' controversy (Carole Tavris, "The G- Spot Controversy," The
Mismeasure of Woman; selection from Janice M. Irvine, Disorders of Desire: Sex
and Gender in Modern American Sexology) 2\. Phallic Wars: Does size matter?
(selections from June Reinisch, The New Kinsey Report on Sexual Behavior;
Janus Report on Sex) 3\. Brains as Sex Organs: Does the brain have a sex?
(selection from Ann Fausto-Sterling, Myths of Gender; Simon LeVay, The Sexual
Brain) B. Sex: sociological 'facts' 1\. Surveying American sexual behavior:
Kinsey, Janus, ... 2\. The prevalence of 'perversions' 3\. Incidence and
causes of sex-related violence (selections from DEH Russell; Donnerstein and
Linz, The Question of Pornography) C. Sex: psychological 'facts' 1\. What is
perversion? (Stoller, DSM I) 2\. Is homosexuality a disease? (selections from
DSM IV) 3\. Is there a male attitude and a female attitude towards sex?
(selection from Tavris; Tisdale, "Talk Dirty to Me") D. Sex: moral 'facts' 1\.
Religious perspectives (Francoeur, "The Religious Suppression of Eros"; George
Kelly, The Catholic Marriage Manual, Ch Three) 2\. Traditional nonreligious
perspectives 3\. Feminist perspectives Weeks 4, 5 and 6: Viewing: Early
Twentieth Century 'Blue Movies', Classics, Pornographic Performance Art III.
Obscenity Law, Censorship and the First Amendment We will study the evolution
of law concerning obscenity, culminating in our own attempts to apply the
current standard to course materials. In line with our hypothesis, we will
consider legislative efforts to regulate food, alcohol and drug consumption,
including the great social experiment of Prohibition. A. Older approaches:
Comstock B. From Comstock to Roth-Alberts v. US C. The Current Standard:
Miller v. California D. Traditional Liberalism's Objections to the Miller
Standard 1\. The 'absolutist' interpretation of the First Amendment, and why
no one holds it 2\. Why and how vagueness matters in the law
("...unconstitutionally vague...") (selections from van Alstyne, The First
Amendment: Cases and Materials) (transitional: Fish - "There's No Such Thing
as Free Speech - and it's a Good Thing, Too") Weeks 7, 8, 9, 10: Viewing:
MacKinnon/Dworkin lecture, Violent Pornography, 'Golden' Era, 'Couples',
R-rated 'slasher' IV. Beyond Obscenity: Civil Rights Approaches to Regulating
Pornography In the early 1980s, feminist legal theorist Catharine MacKinnon,
working with lawyer and author Andrea Dworkin, proposed a new approach to
regulating sexually explicit material, arguing that pornography is a practice
that discriminates against women and should therefore be actionable under
civil, as opposed to criminal, law. We will examine the specific proposal,
general arguments for the approach, and criticisms of both the specifics and
the general arguments. A. Arguments for the MacKinnon/Dworkin Model Ordinance
1\. Why aren't current remedies in criminal and civil law good enough?
(selection from Adult Users Only) a. civil law: libel, etc.; product liability
('he should have known it'd be harmful') b. criminal law: assault, rape 2\.
The Theory of Porn (MacKinnon, Dworkin, Longino, Sunstein) 3\. The Theory-
Laden Data of Porn: Representations, causal powers and harm (selections from
Itzin, Pally) B. MacKinnon's Critics: 1\. Unsympathetic feminist critics
(Vance, Califia, Pally) 2\. Sympathetic feminist critics (West, Cornell) 3\.
Judicial critics (the decision in Hudnut) 4\. Are research on and teaching
about porn permissible? - the problem of context (in)dependence C. The
Rhetoric of (Anti-)Anti-Porn: Arguments ad feminam: 1\. Dworkin's Porn: "So
Long As It's Not Sex and Violence" (Gilbert) (-if it's the intention that
matters...) 2\. The Erotic Power of Only Words: "Catharine MacKinnon, the
Antiporn Star" (Roiphe) (rdgs. on Carrie Nation and Temperance Movement) 3\.
"The Marquis de Meese" (Susan Stewart) Weeks 11, 12 and 13: Viewing:
Homosexual, Bi, BD/SM/Fetish, Amateur Pornography V. Varied Extremes: More
Controversial Cases A. Homosexual pornography 1\. Gay Porn 2\. Lesbian
Sadomasochism (Queen, "Erotic Power and Trust"; Margaret Nichols, "Lesbian
Sexuality: Issues and Developing Theory"; selection from Against
Sadomasochism; selection from SAMOIS, Coming to Power) B. Bi Porn (LWilliams)
C. Sex Workers' Rights (actors, dancers, masseuses, prostitutes) (selection
from Delacoste and Alexander, Sex Work; and/or Vindication of the Rights of
Whores) D. Child pornography - a very special case (selection from New York v.
Ferber) 1\. What is a child? 2\. Do children have sexual states? 3\. The
NAMBLA manifesto E. Amateur pornography, informed consent, and the problem of
genre definition (LWilliams; PHanson, "Sex Lives on Videotape") F. Digital
porn with alien cybersex-could it be obscene? (Gareth Branwyn, "Compu-Sex:
Erotica for Cybernauts," South Atlantic Quarterly 92:4 (Fall, 1993), 779-791;
selection from Penley, Technoculture; selection from Datlow, Alien Sex) Week
14: Viewing: Selected reruns VI. Regulating Porn: Costs and Benefits - Do We
Know What to Do Next? [Repeat Anonymous Survey of Beliefs and
(Mis)information; compare with first survey's results] Viewing Categories of
Sexually Explicit Course Material: In most cases, several examples are
provided; time does not permit viewing of most of the material listed. If a
given item is unavailable or another item is judged more suitable,
substitution of comparable material may be made. If feasible, material will be
made available to students for individual viewing before it is viewed in
class. +Sexually Explicit Print Material on Reserve: Mail-order Catalogues
(all with pictures): (e.g., Great Pictures, Leisure Time Products) Open
Enterprises Mail Order Catalogues: Good Vibrations Catalog of Toys, The
Sexuality Library Print (some with pictures): FACT, SAMOIS, Bright, Dworkin,
Sprinkle... +Anti-Pornography Videos: Not a Love Story, Dreamworlds (-sexually
explicit) [A Civil Rights Approach to Pornography, Catharine A. MacKinnon and
Andrea Dworkin, Tape 7 of "Speech, Equality and Harm: Feminist Legal
Perspectives on Pornography and Hate Propaganda," University of Chicago Law
School, March 5-7, 1993.] [Peril or Pleasure? featuring Evelina Kane of Women
Against Pornography and pornographer Candida Royalle, with appearances by
Annie Sprinkle and Susie Bright. Torrice Productions, 1230 Market St. #123,
SF, CA 94103, $35.00 ppd.] [Video and transcript of Professor Catharine A.
MacKinnon's 11/22/93 appearance before the National Press Club, televised on
C-SPAN.] +Violent pornography: "women are presented as sexual objects, who
experience sexual pleasure in being raped" +Early Twentieth Century 'Blue
Movies': Blue Memories, Blue Memories II +Classics: Deep Throat, The Devil in
Miss Jones, Behind the Green Door, Opening of Misty Beethoven, Insatiable,
Holliday's Legends of Porn +'Golden' (i.e., High-Budget) Era (or, the pre-
camcorder 80s): Every Woman Has a Fantasy, Ribald Tales of Canterbury
+Pornography in the Making: Stairway to Paradise, Tori Welles Goes Behind the
Scenes +Pornographic Performance Art: Annie Sprinkle's Post Porn Modernist,
Sluts and Goddesses Workshop +Sex Education for Adults: Better Sex Video
Series, Behind the Bedroom Door Series, Sex: A Lifelong Pleasure Series, How
to Female Ejaculate +Homosexual Pornography: Gay: Powertool, More of a Man
Lesbian: Suburban Dykes +Bisexual Pornography: Bi-Coastal +Bondage and
Domination (BD), Sadomasochism (SM) [must specify examples of each kind]: Pain
Suite Fetish: from BonVue Enterprises +Amateur Pornography: oldest material
from Video Alternatives, Homegrown Video +'Couples' Videos: Pornography
Intended for The Heterosexual Women and Her 'Significant Other': Femme: Three
Daughters, Revelations MTV-Style Pornography: Night Trips, House of Dreams
Mainstream Efforts: Chameleons, The Masseuse +R-rated 'female-slasher':
Nightmare on Elm Street (I-V) +Food and Sex: La Grande Bouff=E9, The Cook, The
Thief, His Wife and Her Lover Material on Reserve [in University or Department
Library]: In addition to the texts, the following supplemental material is
available.... NOTES: 1Suppose, however, that a MacKinnon/Dworkin ordinance
were in effect in the relevant jurisdiction. One activist associated with work
for the ordinance has suggested that a course that uses pornography (as
defined by the ordinance) would still be permissible just so long as the
pornography was not forced on any student, and the student's informed consent
was obtained in advance. 2Discovering the weaknesses of this hypothesis would,
I believe, be very helpful for students. Many have noted the profound
similarities between the roles of sex and food in societies, and these
analogies need to be handled with care, in part so as not to portray sexual
desire as 'just another biologically determined appetite', especially since
desire for food doesn't meet that description, either. Some of the connections
are horribly vivid in eating disorders. Some references I've found helpful:
Tana Modleski, Feminism without Women: Culture and Criticism in a
"Postfeminist" Age , 152-3, comment on Gayle Rubin, "Thinking Sex," about
Rubin's apparently naive statements regarding both sex and food; Susan Bordo,
Unbearable Weight; Robin West, "Sex, Reason and a Taste for the Absurd,"
Georgetown Law Journal 81 (1993) 2413-2456, criticising Posner's views on sex,
ice cream and the role of preferences; and Carol Tavris, The Mismeasure of
Woman, 226-227, on Masters and Johnson's 'four stages of sexual response' and
'the four phases of eating a meal'. 3Adapted from rules developed by a female
faculty member at George Mason University, who has taught a number of courses
on sensitive subjects and worked extensively with groups of Vietnam veterans,
Holocaust survivors and rape/incest survivors. These rules are quoted, with
derision, in Christina Hoff Sommers, Who Stole =46eminism? My source was the
person who developed the rules, not Hoff Sommers. 4Pornography is the sexually
explicit depiction of persons, in words or images, created with the primary,
proximate aim, and reasonable hope, of eliciting significant sexual arousal on
the part of the consumer of such materials (987). [This characterization is
population-relative:] Important in deciding whether material is likely to
evoke significant sexual arousal [an admittedly somewhat vague term] is its
probable effect on an average person in a certain popula- tion,.... The
reactions of particular individuals are inconclu- sive (988). Encyclopedia of
Ethics (Garland, 1990), 986- 989\. David F. Austin  Associate Professor of
Philosophy and Assistant Head Department of Philosophy and Religion Winston
Hall 101A Box 8103, NCSU Raleigh, NC 27695-8103 (919) 515-6102 FAX (919)
515-7856

