**

COURSE SYLLABUS

Department:** Educational Leadership and Policy Analysis

**

Course Number:** 6955

**

Course Title:** Grant and Proposal Development

**

Semester Hours:** Three (3)

**

Date of this Revision of Syllabus:** Spring 1999

**

Text(s) and /or Required Readings:

**

Brewer, E. W., Achilles, C. M., & Fuhriman, J. R. (1993). _Finding funding:
Grantwriting for the financially challenged educator_. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Corwin Press.

**

Catalog Description:** This course examines the possibilities for additional
funding through grant development. Students use newsletters, foundation and
government publications, as well as Internet to locate sources of funding.
Interviews are conducted with persons who have had previous success in
receiving grant funding. The course also emphasizes refinement of writing
skills, development of an organizational vision, goal setting, political
realities, and public relations techniques. Budget development with software
options as well as audit protocol will also be explored. Presentation and team
building skills are another critical dimension to successful grant funding and
implementation.

**

Additional Course Information:** None

**

Relationship of Course to College and Program Philosophy and Goals:** Securing
grant and alternative funding strongly supports program emphases on
participatory leadership, development of an organizational vision, and
securing group commitment toward goal attainment.

**

Course Objectives:

**

Students will:

1. gain strategies for leading organizations to incorporate new ideas and develop a vision.

2. explore competencies needed to lead groups, develop projects, and conduct meetings.

3. review a variety of funding sources.

4. use electronic information networks to link with funding sources.

5\.  gain skill in developing and communicating a vision.

6. refine their ability to write a grant.

7. develop interview skills to gather information.

8. refine their editing, critical thinking, and critiquing skills.

9. meet and converse with a variety of stakeholders in the grant writing process.

10. gather political insights regarding grant funding.

11. gain marketing and public relations savvy.

12. expand their technology repertoire to include software for budget development, finding sources, and for writing reviews.

13. review funding opportunities to meet the needs of diverse and disenfranchised groups.

14. develop a detailed budget.

15. consider implementation responsibilities.

16. learn the benefits of careful project follow through.

**

Course Topics:

**

1. Grant funding sources.

2\.  Exploration of proven expertise in securing funding.

3\.  Organizational vision and goal development.

4\.  Presentation skills.

5\.  Writing skills for developing grants.

6\.  Technological and other sources of grant requests for proposals.

7\.  Interview skills.

8\.  Developing a writing team.

9\.  Political insights and realities.

10\.  Marketing and public relations savvy.

11\.  Budget formation, maintenance, and preparing for an audit.

12\.  Implementation and follow through.

**

Class Activities (including instructional strategies) and Requirements
(Projects, Papers, Tests, etc.):** Students will conduct, summarize, and
present the results of interviewing a person with successful grant writing
experience. Students will develop a grant which is fully ready for submission.
Students will critique each other's writing and copies of grants.
Instructionally, students complete most activities in small groups. Students
examine and critique abstracts and then attempt to write their own with
support from their small group. Students simulate being part of a review board
or being a grant presenter. Each week students submit for small and large
group review

pieces of grants they are writing.

**

Field Experience Requirements:** Students interview persons at a variety of
agencies or in schools with past success in attaining grants. The entire class
meets in the Office of Institutional Research to learn from the director and
to explore that office's technological capabilities.

**

Supplementary Readings and Materials:** See Bibliography

**

Bibliography:

**

Achilles, C. M., et. al. (1986). _A grantwriter's manual_. Knoxville, TN:
Bureau of Educational Research and Services.

Ashley, W. L. (1991). _Funds for educational equipment: A grant writing
guide_. Columbus, OH: Center on Educational and Training for Employment.

Barron, D. D. (1993). Ask (well) and you will receive. _School Library Media
Activities Monthly_ , _9_ (5), 49-51.

Bauer, D. G. (1994). _The principal's guide to grant success_. New York:
Scholastic.

Belcher, J. C. & Jacobsen, J. M. (1992). _From idea to Funded Project: Grant
Proposals That Work_. Phoenix, Ariz: Oryx Press.

Brewer, E. W. (1993). Managing funding sources and writing grant documents.
_New Directions for Adult and Continuing Education_ , _60_ (37), 21-37.

Brooks, S. (1997). The ins and outs of government funding: what=s in the
pipeline for 1997n and beyond? _Technology & Learning, 17_, 6-30.

Brown, D. N., & Schenck, R. A. (1993). Use of alternative funding by rural
schools for supplemental programs which address current social issues and
special education needs. Conference proceedings, Savannah, GA. RC 019 153.

Donna, S. (1992). From wonder to work. _Momentum, 23_ , 18-22.

Echstein, R. M. (Ed.) (1996). _Directory of Education Grants_. Loxahatchee,
FL: Research Grant Guides, Inc.

Frost, G. J. (Ed.) (1993). _Winning Grant Proposals: Eleven Successful Appeals
by american Nonprofits to Corporations, Foundations, Individuals, and
Government Agencies_. Rockville, MD: Fund Raising Institute.

Gloeckner, G. W. (1993). Key to successful proposal writing. _Technology
Teacher_ , _52_ (6), 49-50.

Golden, S. L. (1997). _Secrets of Successful Grantsmanship: A Guerrilla Guide
to Raising Money_. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers.

Gothberg, H., & Ferrell, E. H. (1993). New sources on grants and grant
writing. _RST Reference Services Review_ , _21_ (2), 17-30.

Hall, M. (1988). _Getting funded: A complete guide to proposal writing_.
Portland, OR: Continuing Education Publications.

Helmer, D. (1998). Annual register of grant support, 1998: A director of
funding sources, 31st ed. _Booklist, 94_ , 1901(1).

Henson, K. T. (1997). The art of writing grant proposals, part 3.
_Contemporary-Education, 18_ , 197-200.

Ivarie, J. J. (1994). Leadership strategy: Building teams. _NASSP
Practitioner_ , _21_ (2), 1-6.

Locke, L. F., Spirduso, W. W., & Silverman, S. J. (1993). _Proposals That
Work: A Guide for Planning Dissertations and Grant Proposals_. Newbury Park:
Sage Publications.

MacPherson, R. T. (1996). _External funding considerations for obtaining
research and training grants_. Paper presented at the American Vocational
Association Convention (Cincinnati, OH, December 5-8, 1996).

Norris, D. (1997). Find the funds for your great ideas. _Instructor, 106_ ,
58-62.

O'Bryan G., & Larsen R. D. (1984). Writing grant proposals: Dispelling the
myths. _Spectrum_ , _2_ (3), 31-34.

Ramsey, N. (1993, November 29). What companies are doing. _Fortune_ , pp.
142-162.

Ramsey, L. A. & Hale, P. D., Jr. (1994). _Winning Federal Grants: A Guide to
the Government =s Grant-Making Process_. Alexandria, VA: Capitol Publications,
Inc.

Reeve, E. M., & Ballard, D. V. (1993). A faculty guide to writing grant
proposals. _Community College Review_ , _63_ (4), 28-31.

Ruskin, K. B. & Achilles, C. M. (1995). _Grantwriting, Fundraising, and
Partnerships: Strategies That Work!_ Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press, Inc.

Shubird, E. (1997). How to make a living asking for money. _Writer =s Digest,
77_, 27-31.

Zimet, E. (1993). Grant writing techniques for K-12 funding. _T.H.E. Journal_
, _21_ (4), 109-112.



Related Sites:

_

http://trioprograms.org/clearinghouse/proposal.html

http://trioprograms.org/council/nmideas.html

_**







COURSE SECTION INFORMATION

Course Number:** 6955

**

Course Title:** Grant and Proposal Development

**

Credit Hours:** 3

**

Semester:** Spring 1999

**

Instructor:**

**

Office Number:**

**

Telephone:**

**

Office Hours:**

**

Course Management and Evaluation Policies:**

An interview will be conducted by each student following guidelines and
questions established by the class. Students will each interview someone with
proven success in attaining grants. Interview results will be presented in
class.

Students will submit a fully developed grant ready to be submitted to a
funding source. Following experience in group and individual class critique,
the final will require students to critique a grant.

INTERVIEW 15 90 - 100 = A

GRANT PROPOSAL 50  80 - 89 = B

CRITIQUE 25 70 - 79 = C

PARTICIPATION 10

**

Class Meeting Schedule:

**

