Syllabus

Out in the Redwoods Internship

Winter 2002

** **

** **

Regional History Project, Room 155A, McHenry Library

Coordinators: Irene Reti ([ihreti@cats.ucsc.edu](mailto:ihreti@cats.ucsc.edu))
and Randall Jarrell ([rjarrell@cats.ucsc.edu](mailto:rjarrell@cats.ucsc.edu))

Phone: 459-2847

Faculty Sponsors: Bettina Aptheker, Judy Yung, Alexandra Stern (faculty
sponsorship will vary by arrangement for each student)



**Internship description:**

Under the direction of the University Library's Regional History Project, this
group internship will introduce students to the theories and methodology of
oral history. Students will participate in the Out in the Redwoods history
project, which will be documenting lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
history over the past four decades at UC Santa Cruz.



Course meets Wednesdays, 1:30-4:30 at the UCSC Women's Center, beginning
January 9, 2002. Attendance at class meetings is required. Participation in
discussion and in-class exercises is part of the evaluation.



# Course requirements

Course will include readings, lectures, in-class exercises, and films. The
workload emphasizes readings in oral history at the beginning of the course.
We will also be viewing four LGBT films in class to give us a basic grounding
in 20th century LGBT history. As the course proceeds, the emphasis of the
assignments and class meetings will shift to conducting and transcribing the
interviews. The class will not meet the weeks of February 27 and March 6, in
order to allow students the intensive time needed for transcription. Remember,
one hour of interview tape equals about six hours of transcribing time.



Students will be responsible for conducting one 90-minute oral history
interview, producing a verbatim transcript of the interview, and writing a
five page biographical/historical essay about their interviewee. Course
coordinators will match each student with an interviewee selected from a list
of individuals who have agreed to be interviewed for this project.
Transcriptions and biographical essays are due the last day of class, **March
13, 2002.**





**Week One: January 9, 2002 --Introduction**

Class introductions

Introduction to Out in the Redwoods (Irene Reti)

Introduction to Oral History (Randall Jarrell)

Video: _Before Stonewall (87 minutes)_



_Assignments_ : Please read "Introduction to Oral History" section of reader:

Dunaway, Starr, Nevins, Grele



# Week Two: January 16, 2002--Oral History Theory and Practice

Discussion of class readings

In-class life history exercise (Irene Reti)

Video: _After Stonewall_ (88 minutes)



_Assignments:_ Read Thompson, Portelli, Gluck, Kennedy in  "Introduction to
Oral History" section of reader.

Please complete data form for practice interview to take place on January 23
in class.



Pick up tape recorder, external mike, and extension cord at Media Services,
Kerr Hall Room 165 on Monday, January 21, 2002 (Note: Please bring your tape
recorder to class on Wednesday January 23, as we will be doing practice
interviews in class.)



# Week Three: January 23, 2002--The Interviewing Process

Discussion of class readings

The Interviewing Process--Randall Jarrell

In-class practice taped interviews (1 hour)

Release forms; troubleshooting the tape recorder

Interviewee assignments distributed.



**Assignments:** Read  "Doing Oral History" section of the reader, Ritchie,
Morrissey, Yow, Anderson and Jack, Oral History Primer and Tips.

Please contact interviewee and set up interview. Interviews **must take place
before February 11** as tape recorders are due back on that date. Please let
instructors know if you have a scheduling problem.



Video: _Living with pride Ruth Ellis @ 100. Documentary with narrative
recreations about the life and times of Ruth Ellis, the oldest "out" African
American lesbian (60 minutes)_



**Week Four, January 30, 2002 --Archives and Oral History**

Guest Speaker: Jacquelyn Marie, Women's Studies Librarian Emeritus, speaking
on LGBT archives, how to ask interviewee about potential archival material

Discussion of readings.

Student consultations: Conducting interview. Students will meet individually
with Irene Reti or Randall Jarrell during class to discuss preparation for
their interviews.



Video: _Outlaw._ Leslie Feinberg, self-identified  "gender outlaw" who has
spent much of

her life passing as a man, speaks with passion and intelligence about her

experiences in this video manifesto. (26 minutes)



_Assignments:_ Read  "LGBT history" section of reader. Please explore websites
and come to class next week prepared to critically discuss one website.

Refine interview question outline.



**Week Five, February 6, 2002 --The Uses of Oral History**

The Uses of Oral History/Other LGBT oral history projects--Class discussion



_Assignment_ : Conducting interviews.

** **

Video: _Out of the past the struggle for gay and lesbian rights. Presents a
history of the struggle for gay and lesbian civil rights.Includes five
historical segments intercut with a story about teenagers at a Utah high
school organizing a Gay-Straight Alliance and their fight for their rights (65
minutes)_

** **

**Week Six, February 13, 2002--Transcribing**

Class discussion of interview experiences.

In-class transcription workshop.



Pick up transcribing machine, Tuesday February 19, 2002. You have the
transcribing machine until March 11, 2002.



_Assignments_ : Readings on transcription in Course Reader.

Transcribe at least the first ten minutes of your interview and bring
transcript to class.



**Week Seven, Feburary 20, 2002 --Transcribing II**

Students bring partial transcripts to class for consultation

Writing the biographical essay/introduction (Randall Jarrell and Irene Reti)



_Assignment:_ Transcribe interview. And write a five page biographical
essay/introduction about the interviewee, which includes a description of the
historical significance of this interview, the setting of the interview, the
strengths and weaknesses of the interview, the biases of the interviewer. How
did conducting this interview affect you as the interviewer?



**Week Eight, February 27, 2002 & Week Nine: March 6, 2002**

Class will not meet. Please work on transcribing interview. Transcribing
machines must be returned to Media Services by **Monday, March 11**. Irene
Reti and Randall Jarrell available by appointment.



**Week Ten: March 13, 2002 --Wrap-up**

Interview transcripts and biographical essays due in class. Please turn in
interview on a zip disk (Microsoft Word prepared) or email as an attachment to
[ihreti@cats.ucsc.edu](mailto:ihreti@cats.ucsc.edu). Please also turn in hard
copy.



Class wrap-up and potluck.



** **



