| ![](images/rutgers-newark.jpg) |

****`_[![](network.gif)](file:///S:/derc.htm)_`****  
---|---  
  
****Distance      Education  
Research Center**** |

****Journals****

[ [Up](resources.htm) ]  
  
| ![](images/ablrule1.gif)  
---|---  
  


|

[What and Why](what_is_de.htm)[  
  
  
](http://www.rutgers.edu/research.shtml)  
  
---  
  
[Players  
  
](players.htm)  
  
[Issues](issues.htm)[  
  
  
](http://www.rutgers.edu/)  
  
[How to  
  
  
](how_to.htm)  
  
[Resources](resources.htm)[  
](http://websearch.rutgers.edu/)  
  
[Contact Us](contact.htm)[  
](contact.htm)  
  
![](rulogo.gif)



[![](_borders/left.h1.jpg)](http://www.educationindex.com/award.html)



|  |  |   | ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Academe This
Week](http://www.chronicle.merit.edu/)

A service of the Chronicle of Higher Education, this includes summaries of
articles; subscribers of the Chronicle receive free access to another service,
Academe Today, which provides full text.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Active
Learning](http://www.cti.ac.uk/publ/actlea/)

Formerly The CTISS File; this twice-yearly publication highlights key
activities and developments within the area of information and higher
education. Supported by Computers in Teaching Initiative based at the
University of Oxford.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [American Communication
Journal](http://www.americancomm.org/~aca/acj/acj.html)

An online, blind-reviewed publication, dedicated to the analysis and criticism
of significant communicative artifacts.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [American Journal of
Distance Education](http://www.ed.psu.edu/acsde/Jour.html)

Designed for professional trainers; teachers in schools, colleges, and
universities; researchers; adult educators; and other specialists in education
and communications.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Association for the
Advancement of Computing in Education](http://www.aace.org/pubs/)

AACE produces several print publications and provides online information about
many titles. AACE is an international, educational, and professional
organization.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Asynchronous Learning
Networks (ALN)](http://www.aln.org/)

contains both JALN, The Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, (scholarly
reviewed articles in the format of a traditional journal) and the ALN
Magazine, (articles and news items with links to additional materials)



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Business Communications
Review (BCR)](http://www.bcr.com/bcrmag/default.asp)

BCR delivers an analysis of networking technology, trends, management issues,
pricing and regulation.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [The Business, Education
and Technology Journal (BETJ)](http://internet.ggu.edu/~bfulkerth/)

The Business, Education and Technology Journal is a publication of the school
of Technology and Industry at Golden Gate University. The Journal is devoted
to the study of the relationships among the disciplines of Business, Education
and Technology. It aims to publish papers that investigate commonalties,
convergence, best practice, conceptual thinking and research findings in these
areas.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [College & University
Media Review](http://www.indiana.edu/~ccumc/c&umr.html)

Includes articles that focus on media and technology, related research,
instructional development, and management and supervision, as related to the
operation of instructional support service units in higher education.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Continuing Professional
Development](http://www.openhouse.org.uk/virtual-university-
press/cpd/welcome.htm)

Online journal is an international journal created to promote personal and
organizational effectiveness through the continuing professional development
of individuals and teams. The journal publishes papers relating to research,
innovative thinking and practice in this field. Published by VUP
International.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)|
[Converge](http://www.convergemag.com)

Monthly magazine focusing on all levels of education and all varieties of
technology. Some articles address distance education.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)|
[DEOSNEWS](http://www.cde.psu.edu/ACSDE/DEOS.html)

an electronic journal available internationally, DEOSNEWS was created to
disseminate information about the research and practice of distance education.
The Distance Education Online Symposium was established in 1991 by The
American Center for the Study of Distance Education at Penn State.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Distance Education: An
International Journal](http://www.usq.edu.au/dec/decjourn/demain.htm)

The aim of the journal is to engender and disseminate research and scholarship
in distance education, open learning and flexible learning systems. Published
twice a year, in May and October, by Open and Distance Learning Association of
Australia (ODLAA).



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Distance Education
Report](http://www.DISTANCE-EDUCATOR.com)

formerly the Distance Educator, the new Report provides table of contents and
certain summaries via the web; in depth stories to subscribers only.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Distance Education
Systemwide Interactive Electronic Newsletter
(DESIEN)](http://www.uwex.edu/disted/desien/index.html)

Each issue offers original articles which emphasize distance education themes
or focus items. News, updates, conference information, and contributions by
subscribers are also regularly included.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Ed.Net
Briefs](http://www.edbriefs.com/briefs.html)

This newsletter, sent weekly via e-mail to subscribers, contains a compilation
of summaries of important or interesting education news stories gathered from
a variety of print and online sources. Each issue contains 6-8 national
education news briefs and 3-4 education-related technology news briefs.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Educational Technology
& Society](http://zeus.gmd.de/ifets/periodical/)

Educational Technology & Society offers academic articles on the issues
affecting the developers of educational systems and educators who implement
and manage such systems.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Educause
Publications](http://www.educause.edu/pub/pubs.html)

Targets academic policy makers and planners by offering concise, timely
information on issues related to legal & policy, national networking, and
teaching & learning in the information technology era. Includes EduPage,
Educom Review, Washington Update and CAUSE/EFFECT.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Electronic
Journals](http://www.cudenver.edu/~mryder/itc_data/ejournals.html)

Journals listed include articles related to learning technologies,
communications and culture. From the University of Colorado at Denver, School
of Education.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Educational Technology
Research and Development (ETR&D)](http://www.aect.org/Pubs/etrdweb/etr_d.html)

Articles on the practical aspects of research as well as applied theory in
educational practice. A source of current research information in
instructional technology.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [European Journal of
Open and Distance Learning](http://www.nks.no/eurodl)

presents a forum for discussion of ODL issues at all educational levels and in
all training contexts.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [From Now On, The
Educational Technology Journal](http://fromnowon.org/)

monthly electronic commentary on educational technology issues published by
Jamie McKenzie.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Going The
Distance](http://www.cdc.gov/phtn/)

The newsletter of the Public Health Training Network, it is meant to help
coordinate federal, state, local, and academic PHTN activities. Newsletter
contributions are encouraged.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)|
[IMEJ](http://imej.wfu.edu/)

The articles in IMEJ are about effective uses of technology in any and all
disciplines within higher education. Authors will describe how they use
computers in their teaching, making a computer-based presentation natural and
direct.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Information Technology
in Postsecondary Education (ITPE)](http://www.hewi.net/index.html)

Newsletter covers news and developments in the field of distance learning with
a special perspective on Washington policy making.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Informing
Science](http://inform.nu/)

The purpose of the journal Informing Science is to provide a better
understanding of fields that inform their clientele. These fields include
information systems, library science, journalism in all its forms, and
education.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [International Journal
of Continuing Engineering Education and Life-Long Learning
(IJCEELLL)](http://www.mscp.edte.utwente.nl/ptk/)

A refereed, international journal that provides a forum and an authoritative
source of information in the field of continuing engineering and management
education, training and career development.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [International Journal
of Educational Technology (IJET)](http://www.outreach.uiuc.edu/ijet/)

A new international refereed journal in the field of educational technology,
sponsored by faculty, staff, and students at The Graduate School of Education
at the University of Western Australia and the College of Education at the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [The Internet and Higher
Education](http://www.sbe.nova.edu/ihe/)

The Internet and Higher Education is a quarterly journal designed to reach
those faculty, staff, and administrators charged with the responsibility of
enhancing instructional practices and productivity via the use of Information
Technology (IT) and the Internet.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Journal of Distance
Education](http://www.hil.unb.ca/Texts/JDE/)

The Journal of Distance Education is an international publication of the
Canadian Association for Distance Education (CADE). Its aim is to promote and
encourage scholarly work of an empirical and theoretical nature that relates
to distance education in Canada and throughout the world. Abstracts are fully
searchable in both French and English.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Journal of Distance
Learning Administration](http://www.westga.edu/~distance/jmain11.html)

The Journal of Distance Learning Administration is a peer-reviewed electronic
journal offered free each quarter. The Journal welcomes manuscripts based on
original work of practitioners and researchers with specific focus or
implications for the management of distance education programs.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Journal of Interactive
Media in Education (JIME)](http://www-jime.open.ac.uk/jime/)

JIME has developed a journal review environment in which submitted articles
and open peer review are tightly integrated with each other, and central to
the journal's operation. Published by the Knowledge Media Institute of the
Open University.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Journal of Library
Services For Distance Education](http://www.westga.edu/library/jlsde/)

The Journal of Library Services for Distance Education is a peer-reviewed
e-journal. International in scope, this scholarly e-journal will publish
refereed articles focusing on the issues and challenges of providing
research/information services to students enrolled in formal post-secondary
distance education.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)|
[Kairos](http://english.ttu.edu/kairos/)

An online forum for the exploration of writing, learning, and teaching in
hypertextual environments like the World-Wide Web.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Learning
Circuits](http://www.learningcircuits.org/)

Launched by ASTD in January, 2000, Learning Circuits presents a monthly suite
of feature articles, departments, and columns that examine new technologies
and how they are being applied for workplace learning.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Learning
Technology](http://lttf.ieee.org/learn_tech/issues.html)

The Learning Technology aims to report the activities of Learning Technology
Task Force including various announcements, work in progress, projects,
participation opportunities, additions/modifications to the website and so on.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [LT
Highlights](http://olt-bta.hrdc-drhc.gc.ca/pract/nletter/index.html)

A bimonthly electronic service of current awareness for instructors who are
interested in the issues related to technology-assisted learning.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [MC Journal:The Journal
of Academic Media
Librarianship](http://wings.buffalo.edu/publications/mcjrnl/v4n1/)

Volume 4#1 Summer 1996 was a special Distance Learning issue. MC JOURNAL is a
peer reviewed electronic journal, published on an irregular basis.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)|
[NetWorking](http://node.on.ca/networking/)

Networking is a biweekly bulletin dedicated to disseminating news and
information about activities and developments in distance education and
learning technologies at Canadian colleges, universities, and organizations,
published by [the NODE Learning Technologies Network.](http://node.on.ca/)



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [On the
Horizon](http://horizon.unc.edu/horizon/)

Offers provocative, thoughtful, stimulating, sometimes controversial insights
that will help you set the right priorities for the years ahead. On the
Horizon draws on the expertise and insights of contributors from a variety of
backgrounds and disciplines-educators, public and industry leaders, scholars,
and other professionals concerned with the future of education-to give you the
broadest and most informed coverage of the critical developments that are
reshaping the world you live and teach in.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Online Chronicle of
Distance Education &
Communication](http://www.fcae.nova.edu/disted/index.html)

The Online Chronicle is the electronic source for information about distance
education produced by Nova Southeastern University. The Chronicle appears
semi-annually and includes abstracts, short articles, announcements,
conference listings, and an information exchange all related to distance
education and communication.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [The Quarterly Review of
Distance Education (QRDE)](http://www.aect.org/Pubs/QRDE.htm)

The Quarterly Review of Distance Education is a rigorously refereed journal
publishing articles, research briefs, reviews, and edi-torials dealing with
the theories, research, and practices of distance education.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)|
[SyllabusWeb](http://www.syllabus.com/)

SyllabusWeb is a free service from Syllabus Press, publishers of Syllabus
magazine and producers of the annual Syllabus conference. This site contains
information on technologies used to enhance education.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [TechLearn Trends On-
Line Newsletter](http://www.masie.com/)

Free updates on technology and learning from The MASIE Center, including a
regular emailed newsletter. Archived issues on-line, also.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Technological Horizons
in Education (T.H.E.) Journal Online](http://www.thejournal.com/)

News on the world of computers & related technologies, focusing on
applications that improve teaching & learning for all ages.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [The Technology
Source](http://horizon.unc.edu/)

The purpose of The Technology Source is to provide articles that will assist
educators as they face the challenge of integrating information technology
tools in teaching and in managing educational organizations.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)|
[TechTrends](http://www.aect.org/Pubs/TechTrends/techtrends.html)

Features articles on how the latest developments in technology affect
education and training.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Training and
Development Magazine](http://www.astd.org/virtual_community/td_magazine/)

Training & Development is an official publication of the American Society for
Training & Development, a not-for-profit association of professionals in the
field of human resource development, workplace learning, and performance
improvement. T&D is a monthly magazine available to ASTD national members as
part of their dues, and also by subscription and single-copy sales.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Transforming Teaching
with Technology!](http://www.wested.org/tie/dlrn/ttnews/index.html)

This interactive newsletter will focus on the role of emerging technologies as
catalysts to improve student learning. Each edition will focus on a specific
class of technology, and spotlight various projects that use it.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)|
[TrainingLIVE!](http://www.trainingsupersite.com/TrainingLIVE/index.htm)

Monthly multimedia streaming magazine which addresses issues and discusses
topics of specific interest to training, training-development and human
resource professionals. These hour-long, web-delivered, interactive sessions
use streaming audio/video, presentation slides and feedback features to bring
the multimedia to life. Broadcasts (or webcasts) will be streamed directly
from conferences, studios, meeting rooms, and other locations. Free demo
available.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Voice
2000](http://www.bcr.com/voice2000/default.asp)

A quarterly supplement, this is [BCR's](http://www.bcr.com/bcrmag/default.asp)
guide to emerging technologies.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [The Virtual University
Gazette](http://www.geteducated.com)

A free electronic newsletter for distance learning professionals. Offers new
distance learning programs, unique industry/university collaborations,
emerging trends and issues related to online learning at the adult and
continuing education levels, and more.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [Virtual University
Journal](http://www.openhouse.org.uk/virtual-university-press/vuj/welcome.htm)

Published by VUP International, this is an international journal created to
promote personal and organizational effectiveness through the continuing
professional development of individuals and teams. The journal publishes
papers relating to research, innovative thinking and practice in this field.



| ![](_themes/copy-of-sumi-painting/bulletlist1.gif)| [WebNet
Journal](http://www.webnetjrl.com/)

The WebNet Journal is a quarterly magazine focusing on WWW, Internet, and
Intranet-based technologies, applications, research, and issues. This Journal
similarly offers an international forum for researchers, developers, and users
to exchange ideas and information on a broad range of current topics.

  
---|---  
| ![](images/journal.gif) | **Searchable Collections of Online Journals:**  
|  |

> > > [e-journal](http://www.edoc.com/ejournal/) provided by e-doc.

>>>

>>> [Electronic Journal Collection](http://ejournals.cic.net/search.html);
search the bibliographic records of all the journals in the Committee on
Institutional Cooperation (CIC)collection.

>>>

>>> [Internet Public Library](http://www.ipl.org/reading/books/index.html);
all manner of books and other texts that are freely available over the
Internet. Browsable and searchable by author, title, or Dewey Subject
Classification.

>>>

>>> [A list of Distance Education journals and
newsletters](http://webster.commnet.edu/HP/pages/darling/journals.htm), put
together by [The International Centre for Distance Learning
(ICDL)](http://acacia.open.ac.uk/).

  
---|---  
  
  
|  | ![](images/ablrule1.gif)



[![download Netscape 4.0](_borders/left.h8.gif)](http://204.123.2.93/netscape)
[![](_borders/left.h9.gif)](http://www.microsoft.com/ie/download/)      [![get
Acrobat
Reader](_borders/left.h10.gif)](http://www.adobe.com/prodindex/acrobat/readstep.html#reader)

[ [Case Study](new_page_6.htm) ] [ [News](new_page_7.htm) ] [
[Articles](articles.htm) ] [ [Reports](reports.htm) ] [ [Standards and
Policies](standards_and_policies.htm) ] [ [Syllabi and Course](syllabi.htm) ]
[ [Search](search.htm) ] [ Journals ]

![](images/feedback1.gif)
[![](images/find1.gif)](http://www.rutgers.edu/menus/searcheng.shtml)
[![](images/home1.gif)](file:///S:/derc.htm)
[![](images/address.gif)](http://www-
cis.rutgers.edu/rolodex/Search/searchcom.html)**Address
**[![](images/search1.gif)](file:///S:/search.htm)

_[This website is always under construction, Please send us your comment and
suggestion!](file:///S:/comment.htm)_

_Last edited at:12/12/00 05:20:00 PM_  
  
---|---

