

    LIT 235.01 World Literature I	                Office Hours:
    
    
    
    Spring 2000 Semester                          M, 8:30-11:00 am
    
    
    
    TR, 4:00-5:15 pm                              W, 8:30-11:00 am
    
    
    
    North Campus 064                              R, 8:30-11:00 am
    
    
    
    David L. Keller, Instructor                   F, 8:30-11:00 am
    

Office: NC 131, ext. 163

E-mail: [dlkeller@ovc.edu](mailto:dlkeller@ovc.edu)

Rationale: One literature course (either LIT 235--World Literature I or LIT
236--World Literature II) is required in OVC's core curriculum or general
education program. A fairly standard requirement in American higher education,
a literature survey course requirement fosters the development of general
reading skills and of more specific literary aesthetic sensibilities. The
chronological survey reveals the importance of understanding the dialectical
relationship between literature and history, each influencing the other. In a
broader sense, literature addresses fundamental, philosophical human concerns
related to the nature and meaning of human experience that are at the heart of
a liberal education.

Catalog Description: World Literature I (3 credits) This course surveys
literature of Western, Eastern and African cultures from ancient civilizations
through the seventeenth century. Focus is on discussion of and response to
primary texts. Prerequisite: ENG 132 or consent of instructor.

III. Resource Materials:

A. Wilkie, Brian and James Hurt, eds. _Literature of the Western World: The
Ancient World Through the Renaissance_. Vol. 1. 4th ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 1996.

B. Supplementary reading assignments may be required. Some of these will be
distributed in class; others will be placed on reserve at the call desk of the
library.

IV. Objectives:

A. To read for enjoyment selections from the major writers of Western
Civilization from the Ancient World through the Renaissance. This objective is
of primary significance: alone, it justifies the course, and without it, none
of the other objectives could be met. Reading the selections aloud, reading
the selections in the company of other students, and reading in advance of
time pressures to complete the reading enhance the ability to enjoy the
reading.

Methodology: Reading assignments

Assessment: Reading quizzes

B. To learn to respond to the literature through conscious reflection on first
responses, through asking questions implied by the writers' choices, and
through struggling to answer those questions.

Methodology: Response journals, group and class discussions

Assessment: Evaluation of journals and group reports

C. To relate the literature to questions of universal scope and eternal
significance, thereby to come to a greater appreciation of the literature and
the inherent value of art.

Methodology: Small group and class discussions

Assessment: Essay assignments and exam essays

D. Through the writing process, to discover one's reactions to the literature
and to communicate those reactions.

Methodology: Journal writing and group and class discussions

Assessment: Evaluation of journals and group reports

E. To consider how the readings are a reflection of and a force within their
contemporary social, political, and cultural milieu; to be able to describe
the major literary characteristics, themes, genres, and works of the Ancient
World, the Middle Ages and the Renaissance.

Methodology: Class handouts, lecture and discussion

Assessment: Mid-term and final examination

F. To introduce some of the major critical approaches to literature
(objective, socio-historical, feminist, psychoanalytic, etc.) and to see their
values and their limitations.

Methodology: Class handouts, lecture and discussion

Assessment: Mid-term and final examination

G. To strengthen written and oral communication skills and research skills.
Special attention will be paid to improving the "process" of writing
(prewriting, drafting, revising and editing.)

Methodology: Essay and research writing and rewriting; class discussions

Assessment: Evaluation of written assignments

H. To strengthen skills in critical and creative thinking (focusing,
analyzing, synthesizing, organizing, evaluating and problem solving).

Methodology: Group discussions, essay and research writing

Assessment: Evaluation of written work including group reports

I. To "adopt" one of the writers discussed for further reading and study.

Methodology: Research project subject selection

Assessment: Essay question on final examination

J. To become familiar with the major bibliographic tools and reference works
in the area of literature and to acquire basic competency in using these
resources.

Methodology: Research project

Assessment: Evaluation of bibliography of research project

V. Evaluation

A. Reading Quizzes: Prior to discussion of the works of literature, an
objective reading quiz will be given for each major reading assignment. The
final quiz average will account for 20% of the course grade.

B. Response Journal: Students will freewrite responses to the assigned
readings and submit these responses at the beginning of the class period in
which the readings are discussed. The responses will include (a) reactions to
the reading, (b) questions posed to the author or the text, (c) quotations or
details that stand out as "clues" in understanding the text, and (d) a
statement or statements of "theme," generalizations that might serve as an
interpretive "bottom-line" of the selection. The response journals will
account for 10% of the final course grade.

C. Students will write three essays, one in response to the ancient or
classical literature, on in response to the medieval literature, and one in
response to renaissance literature. The papers should be at least three pages
in length (approximately 1,000 words), and they should be generated on a word
processor. The tentative due dates are February 17, March 16, and April 20.
Late papers will receive grade penalties. The letter grades given the papers
will be A, B, C, and R (for "rewrite"). Any paper MAY be rewritten for a re-
evaluation. Rewrites must be submitted no later than two weeks following the
initial evaluation. Originals must be submitted with the re-writes. Work that
is required to be rewritten and is not completed will count as an F. These
papers will account for 30% of the final course grade.

D. A research paper is required which will account for 20% of the final course
grade. The topic must be approved by January 20. A working bibliography of at
least 10 sources is due on January 27. Note cards, or the equivalent, of
research data collected are due on February 3. An outline and thesis statement
are due on February 17. A draft of the first page with at least one citation
is due on February 24. The final draft is due on March 2.

E. A mid-term examination on the material covered to that point and a final
examination on the material covered in the second half of the semester will be
given. These exams will include both objective and essay questions and will
account for 20% of the final course grade.

F. Students wishing to take the course for "honors" credit should discuss with
the instructor within the first week of classes the qualifications and
requirements for this option.

Grade descriptions: On any particular assignment, an "A" reflects outstanding
work, including critical and creative thinking and mature, error-free writing.
A "B" represents good work, including solid, fundamental writing skills. A "C"
represents competent work and a minimum level of attaining the course
objectives. A "D" represents unsatisfactory work and a failure to attain all
the course objectives. An "F" represents unsatisfactory work and effort and an
almost total lack of accomplishing course objectives.

VI. Policies:

A. Attendance: The school policy of class attendance (on page 19 of the
catalog) will be strictly enforced.

B. Other policies regarding dress and conduct (as outlined in the student
handbook) will also be strictly enforced.

VII. Honesty: If the instructor has sufficient evidence to verify a violation
of academic honesty, the student in question will be subject to receiving a
failing grade on that assignment or a withdrawal-failing grade for the course.
Therefore, it is imperative, not only that each students do their own work,
but that they protect their work and do all within their power to keep others
from using it. Daily writings should _NOT_ be shared. Materials should _NOT_
be left on the hard disks of computers. Floppy disks should _NOT_ be made
available for use by other students. The individual whose material is stolen
is subject to the same penalties as the individual who steals the material.

VIII Compliance with Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA): Students with a
diagnosed disability who need special accommodations should notify the Office
of the Vice President for Academic Affairs before or immediately after the
first scheduled class meeting. When the disability has been verified, the
instructor will work with the student and with the Office of Academic Affairs
to insure that the student has a fair opportunity to perform successfully in
the course.

IX. Reading List

Week One: Introduction to course; Gilgamesh

Week Two: Job; research topic due

Week Three: Greek tragedy (to be selected); research bibliography due

Week Four: Greek tragedy (continued); research notecards due

Week Five: Aristotle; Plato

Week Six: Anselm/Aquinas; Shakuntala; essay #1 due; research thesis and
outline due

Week Seven: Dante; Koran; research draft of first page due

Week Eight: Sir Gawain; final draft of research paper due

Week Nine: Chaucer; essay #2 due

Week Ten: Cervantes

Week Eleven: Shakespeare (Henry V)

Week Twelve: Shakespeare (continued)

Week Thirteen: Donne

Week Fourteen: Milton; essay #3 due

Week Fifteen: Milton (continued)

Week Sixteen: Final Examinations

This syllabus reflects the best intentions regarding the delivery of this
course. The instructor retains the right, however, to make appropriate
adjustments in assignments or in the scheduling as necessary.

XI. Student acknowledgment for LIT 235: The instructor has given me the course
syllabus and explained each section. I was given the opportunity to ask
questions in class and, if needed, to schedule an individual appointment to
ask further questions and/or clarify additional items of the syllabus. I
understand the Attendance Policy.

Name____________________________________ Date ______________

* * *

[![Return to OHIO VALLEY COLLEGE Home Page ](../ovc.gif) ![Return to OHIO
VALLEY COLLEGE Home Page ](../hompgbtn.gif)](../index.htm)
http://www.ovc.edu/keller/sylli235.htm Last updated on January 19, 2000  
Page maintained by David Keller, <[dkeller@ovc.edu](mailto:dkeller@ovc.edu)>  

