  |  ![Links of Interest - Normandy, WWII, WWI, Holocaust, Spanish Civil
War](links1.GIF)  
---|---  
|

[Normandy, D-Day, & France](links2.htm) | [Spanish Civil War](links3.htm) |
[Holocaust](links4.htm) |  
[Occupation of France](links5.htm) | General World War II |
[Personalities](links7.htm) | [World War I ](links8.htm) [|Normandy Scholars
Websites](links9.htm) [|](links8.htm) [Knoxville News-Sentinel
Articles](links10.htm)

**** All external links will open in a new browser window ****

**_General World War II_**

**[German Armed Forces in World War II](http://www.feldgrau.com/):  an
outstanding site concerning the military history of the German Armed Forces
and the European Axis Allies from 1933 - 1945.  Site contains information on
battles, interviews with German veterans, posters, photographs, and lots
more.**

**[University of North Carolina World War II
Resources](http://metalab.unc.edu/pha/): original documents regardings all
aspects of the War**

**[The Drop Zone](http://www.thedropzone.org/): virtual museum and oral
history project**

**[[RE]collections + collections](http://itc.utk.edu/WWII/): based on the
memories of William Yenofsky, an 87-year-old man of Jewish faith who, as an
American soldier, fought for four years overseas during World War II**

**[Internet Modern History
Sourcebook](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/modsbook4.html): a compendium
of primary source materials collected by Fordham University**

**[The University of Tennessee Center for the Study of War&
Society](http://web.utk.edu/~csws/):  manuscripts, documents, and photos as
well as many books.  The Center, located in the old library, is an excellent
resource for students and others interested in military history.**

**[The U.S. Army Center for Military History](http://www.army.mil/cmh-
pg/default.htm):  includes a section on the [Normandy
Invasion](http://www.army.mil/cmh-pg/reference/normandy/normandy.htm)**

**[World War II and Canada](http://www.er.uqam.ca/merlin/ck191898/wwii.htm):
a fairly comprehensive site with both English and French links.**

**[Avalon Project at Yale Law
School](http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/20th.htm):  a huge site containing
primary documents on WWII and other events of historical importance.  Also
contains a search engine.  The documents in this site are set up by century
(Pre-18th through 20th).**

**[Fact Sheet:  D-Day, 6 June
1944](http://history.cc.ukans.edu/heritage/abilene/ikedday.html):  brief
overview of D-Day operations.**

**[The Rutgers University Oral History of World War
II](http://history.rutgers.edu/oralhistory/orlinf.htm): many interviews with
WWII veterans are available on-line.**

**[Valour and Horror](http://www.valourandhorror.com/): the Canadian
Experience in World War II**

**[Normandy 1944: Canada Remembers](http://www.vac-
acc.gc.ca/historical/secondwar/normandy.htm#d_day)**

**[Normandy 1944](http://normandy.eb.com/normandy/):  An excellent site by
Encyclopedia Britannica.  This is a very large site with a wealth of
information on the Normandy campaign.**

**[Military History at The Mining
Company](http://militaryhistory.miningco.com/):  A huge site containing
sections on [Western Europe](http://history1900s.miningco.com/msub22.htm),
[World War II](http://history1900s.miningco.com/msub8.htm), and many other
aspects of war and peace. **

**[The History Place](http://www.historyplace.com/index.html):   An
exceptional [timeline of World War
II](http://www.historyplace.com/worldwar2/timeline/ww2time.htm) as well as a
[Holocaust
timeline](http://www.historyplace.com/worldwar2/holocaust/timeline.html).
This site is very large and also contains a "[Points of
View](http://www.historyplace.com/pointsofview/index.html)" section with
essays by historians, and historical book and film reviews. **

**[World War II Sounds and Pictures
Page](http://earthstation1.simplenet.com/wwii.html):  large collection of
files for viewing and listening.**

**[Grolier Online World War II
Links](http://gi.grolier.com/wwii/ww2link.html): a series of WWII
commemoration sites, including the World War II Memorial Project in Washington
and "In Desperate Battle" about the 5,000 Canadians who died in Normandy
between June 6 and August 24, 1944.**

**[HeavyBombers.com](http://www.heavybombers.com/): a resource that lists
ninety-six (96) separate Bombardment Groups plus a few specialty units. If you
are looking for a unit of the Army Air Forces that flew the B-17 Flying
Fortress, the B-24 Liberator, or B-29. Superfortress, in W.W.II, you can find
it here. **

**[The Third Reich Factbook](http://www.skalman.nu/third-reich/): an
apolitical site devoted to the history of the Third Reich and the NSDAP.**

**[American War Orphans Network (AWON)](http://www.awon.org/): The American
WWII Orphans Network is an organization of sons and daughters of Americans
killed and missing in World War II.**

**[World War II](http://www.paperlessarchives.com/world_war_ii.html):
Paperless Archives World War II titles cover Roosevelt, Truman, and Eisenhower
presidential papers, and material on Winston Churchill, Hitler, Berlin, Cold
War Beginnings, Pearl Harbor, Tokyo Rose,  Invasion of Japan plans, A-Bomb
development and usage & more.**  


**Top of page for more links**

  
|  [![Normandy Scholars Program](program.GIF)](program.htm)[![Normandy
Scholars Curriculum](curricu.GIF)](curricu.htm)[![Normandy Scholars
Syllabus](syllabus.GIF)](syllabus.htm)[![Selection
Criteria](criteria.GIF)](criteria.htm)  
[![Normandy Photos](photos.GIF)](pictmain.htm)[![Past & Present Normandy
Scholars](scholars.GIF)](scholars01.htm)[![Normandy Scholars Contact
Information at UT Knoxville](contacts.GIF)](contacts.htm)[![Links of Interest
- Normandy, WWII, Spanish Civil War and More](links.GIF)](links.htm)

[![Back to Home Page](home.GIF)](default.html)  
|  **Comments, Questions about the Normandy Scholars Program:   [Dr. John B.
Romeiser](mailto:jromeise@utk.edu)**  
**Comments about or problems with the web site:[Dr. John B.
Romeiser](mailto:jromeise@utk.edu)**  
**Site Last Updated:  07/16/02**

**Copyright (C) 1997-2002.  Dr. John B. Romeiser and the University of
Tennessee Knoxville.  All Rights Reserved.**

