### History 548.02  
Modern Japan



_Description_ : This course treats all major aspects of Japanese history since
about 1800, including politics, economic trends, socio-cultural and
intellectual changes, and foreign relations. However, certain themes receive
particular stress. One is the conflict between local institutions and foreign
ideologies like Marxism and Christianity. Another is the socio-economic roots
of World War II from the Japanese side. A third is the development of Japanese
science and technology. And a fourth is the contemporary rise of Japan to
economic great power status and heightened political prominence.



_Objectives_ : History 548.02 is conceived as a general survey of modern
Japanese history for history majors or any other undergraduate student with an
interest in the subject. It seeks to convey a nuanced understanding of
Japanese historical experience during the past two centuries. It is intended
also as an opportunity for students to sharpen their analytical skills in both
the examinations, in class discussion, and especially in the course paper. It
introduces particular topics - the Great Depression and World War II, Japan's
post-1945 economic recovery, the rise of advanced science and technology, the
country's surge of economic growth of recent decades - that are central to
contemporary relations between the United States and Japan, as well as in the
present day world at large. The course aims to deepen students' understanding
of all such issues.



_Format Requirements and Evaluation_ : The course follows a lecture-discussion
format with regular use of audio-visual materials (primarily transparencies
and computer-scanned images but with the possible use of occasional films).
Discussion. not confined to any particular day, constitutes about a quarter of
class time, lectures and a-v matter the remainder. All students are asked to
take a midterm examination, attend class faithfully and participate in
discussions, write a course paper (see below), and take the final
comprehensive examination. Course grades will be calculated as follows:

    
    
        Midterm examination            20 percent
        Course paper                   30 percent
        Participation & discussion     10 percent
        Final examination              40 percent
    
    



_Readings_ : All students are asked to purchase their own copies of the
following books, available at the campus area bookstores:

  1. Andrew Gordon (ed.), _Postwar Japan As History_
  2. Mikiso Hane, _Modern Japan: A Historical Survey,_ 2nd ed. 
  3. Tessa Morris-Suzuki, _The Technological Transformation of Japan_
  4. Gwen Terasaki, _Bridge To The Sun_ 

Two additional readings are also assigned and will be available on three day
or closed reserve at the Sullivant Undergraduate Library:

> James Bartholomew, Chapter 7 of The Formation of Science in Japan and essay,
'Why Was There No Scientific Revolution in Tokugawa Japan ?"



_Course Papers_ : All students are to write a paper which compares two essays
from the Gordon edited volume, _Postwar Japan As History._ There are a number
of possible pairings, but the following' are especially recommended: 1) Garon
& Mochizuki and Taira, 2) Buckley and Koschmann. 3) Ivy and White. 4) Buckley
and Uno, 5) Gluck and Cumings, 6) Dower and Gluck. Other pairings must be
approved by the instructor. Papers should not exceed 8 double-spaced. typed
pages and will be due on Monday of the tenth week of the term.



**Lecture Topics and Reading Assignments**

_Week One_ : Tokugawa Background, Tokugawa Political System, Economic and
Cultural Trends, Meiji Restoration and Its Meaning

Readings: Hane, pp. 1-83; Morris-Suzuki, pp. 13-67; Bartholomew, `'Why Was
There No Scientific Revolution in Tokugawa Japan?"



_Week Two_ : Early Meiji Reforms, Liquidation of Feudalism, Education Reforms,
Early Industrialization

Readings: Hane, pp. 84-109; Morris-Suzuki, pp. 71-104.



_Week Three_ : Political And Social Trends, Constitutional Government
Movement, Meiji Constitutional System, Watershed of 1890

Readings: Hane, pp. 110-170.



_Week Four_ : Cultural And Intellectual Climate, Christianity and the
Intellectuals, Marxism and Japanese Intellectuals, The Japanese Left,
1890-1923

Readings: Hane, pp. 171-191.



_Week Five_ : Science And Society In Japan, Rise of Western Science, Science
in Meiji-Taisho Society, Science and the Crisis of World War I

Readings: Hane, pp. 192-219; Morris-Suzuki, pp. 105-142; Bartholomew, Chapter
7 of The Formation of Science in Japan.



_Week Six_ : Nationalism's Social Base, Modern Japanese Nationalism,
Industrial Growth: 1890-1923

Readings: Hane, pp. 220-244.

_MIDTERM EXAMINATION_



_Week Seven_ : Militarism And Continental Expansion, Japan's China Policy to
1931, Manchukuo and Japan, Radicalism of Left and Right

Readings: Hane, pp. 245-309; Morris-Suzuki, pp. 143-157; Terasaki, pp. 1-88.



_Week Eight_ : War, Defeat, and Occupation; Japan and World War II; The
Occupation, Phase I; The Occupation, Phase II

Readings: Hane, pp. 310-374; Morris-Suzuki, pp. 161-179; Terasaki, pp. 89-260;
Gordon, pp. 3-95.



_Week Nine_ : Early Postwar Japan, Politics and Foreign Affairs, Recovery
Strategies (1950s), Early Affluence (1960s)

Readings: Gordon, pp. 99-122, 145-186.



_Week Ten_ : Rise To World Prominence, Forgotten Japan: the 1970s, Education
and Culture, Japan in the 1980s and 1990s

Readings: Hane, pp. 375-422; Morris-Suzuki, pp. 179-244; Gordon, pp. 239-258,
293-447.



_FINAL EXAMINATION DURING EXAMINATION WEEK_

