![](images/rainblok.gif)

##  Syllabus of Readings for Complex Adaptive Systems  
and Agent-Based Computational Economics

![](images/rainblok.gif)

**Last Updated:** 19 March 2002

**Site maintained by:**      Leigh Tesfatsion     Department of Economics
Iowa State University     Ames, Iowa 50011-1070     [
http://www.econ.iastate.edu/tesfatsi/](http://www.econ.iastate.edu/tesfatsi/)
![](images/email.gif) [ tesfatsi@iastate.edu](mailto:tesfatsi@iastate.edu)

**Agent-Based Computational Economics (ACE) Web Site:**      [
http://www.econ.iastate.edu/tesfatsi/ace.htm](http://www.econ.iastate.edu/tesfatsi/ace.htm)  
**ISU Complex Adaptive Systems Workshop Homepage:**     [
http://www.econ.iastate.edu/tesfatsi/caswork.htm](http://www.econ.iastate.edu/tesfatsi/caswork.htm)  

![](images/rfadebar.gif)

**Acknowledgements:**      This continuously updated site is a source of
readings for the weekly interdisciplinary [ Complex Adaptive Systems
Workshop](http://www.econ.iastate.edu/tesfatsi/caswork.htm) at Iowa State
University. It is based in part on the artificial life syllabi prepared by
Emanuel Gruengard (Bar-Ilan University), John Koza (Stanford University), and
Martin Zwick (Portland State University), and on the Frequently Asked
Questions (FAQ) manual maintained by Joerg Heitkoetter of the University of
Dortmund for the newsgroup comp.ai.genetic. Various [ CAS/ACE-related Web
sites](http://www.econ.iastate.edu/tesfatsi/allist.htm) and [ journals,
magazines, and publishing
companies](http://www.econ.iastate.edu/tesfatsi/publish.htm) have also been
consulted.

![](images/rfadebar.gif)

##  ![](images/raincube.gif) Overview:

Many natural systems, and increasingly many artificial (man-made) systems as
well, are characterized by apparently complex behaviors that arise as the
result of nonlinear spatio-temporal interactions among a large number of
components or subsystems. Examples of such natural systems include immune
systems, nervous systems, multicellular organisms, ecologies, and insect
societies. Artificial systems sharing this property include parallel and
distributed computing systems, large-scale communication networks, artificial
neural networks, evolutionary algorithms, large-scale software systems, and
economies. Such systems have recently come to be known as Complex Adaptive
Systems (CAS).

Researchers in a large number of disparate areas have begun to address the
analysis and synthesis of CAS through a combination of applied, theoretical,
and experimental methods. At ISU, for example, interest in such systems has
attracted the attention of faculty and students from biology, computer
science, economics, engineering, mathematics, neuroscience, philosophy,
psychology, and zoology. One goal of CAS research is to enhance the
understanding of natural and artificial systems, both actual and potential. A
second goal is to use this understanding to help develop solution algorithms
for difficult optimization problems exhibiting high-dimensional search
domains, nonlinearities, and multiple local optima.

[ Agent-based computational economics
(ACE)](http://www.econ.iastate.edu/tesfatsi/ace.htm) is the computational
study of economies modelled as evolving systems of autonomous interacting
agents. ACE is thus a specialization to economics of the basic CAS paradigm.

![](images/rfadebar.gif)

##  ![](images/raincube.gif) CAS/ACE Readings by Topic Area:

  1. [ Introductory Overviews](sylintro.htm)
  2. [ Evolutionary Computation](evcomp.htm)
    1. [ Introductory Readings](evcomp.htm#EvCompIntro)
    2. [ Genetic Algorithms and Evolving Rule sets](evcomp.htm#GA)
    3. [ Genetic Programming](evcomp.htm#GP)
    4. [ Evolutionary Programming and Evolution Strategies](evcomp.htm#EP)
    5. [ Artificial Neural Networks](evcomp.htm#ANN)
    6. [ Other Readings of Interest](evcomp.htm#Other)
  3. [Robotics](robot.htm)
  4. [ Biological Evolution](bioevol.htm)
    1. [ Key Issues in Biological Evolution](bioevol.htm#Key)
    2. [ Game Theory Approaches to Biological Evolution](bioevol.htm#GameBio)
  5. [ Social Evolution](socevol.htm)
    1. [ Adaptation, Learning, and Innovation](socevol.htm#Adapt)
    2. [ Game Theory Approaches to Social Evolution](socevol.htm#GameSoc)
  6. [ Economic and Social Network Formation](networks.htm)
  7. [ Critiques](critics.htm)
  8. [ Software and Software Development](software.htm)
  9. [ Commercial Development and Application](commerce.htm) 

![](images/rrightar.gif) **Previewing Information:**      Some of the
materials available for downloading are in postscript (ps) or in adobe
portable document format (pdf); all others are html documents. [ Ghostview and
Ghostscript for Windows](http://netlib.bell-labs.com/who/wim/ghost/), released
as freeware under the GNU General Public License, can be used to preview and
print ps files on personal computers. [ Adobe Acrobat Reader for
Windows](http://www.adobe.com/products/acrobat/readermain.html), also
downloadable as freeware, can be used to preview and print pdf files on
personal computers.

![](images/rfadebar.gif)

###  Copyright (C) 2002 Leigh Tesfatsion. All Rights Reserved.



