  
**WRITING A SYLLABUS**  
---  
  
> By Howard B. Altman, University of Louisville and William E. Cashin, Kansas
State University  
>  
>  "Would you tell me, please, which way I ought to go from here?"  
>  "That's depends a good deal on where you want to get to."...  
>  ( _Alice in Wonderland,_ Chapter VI, P 64; Carroll, 1960)

  
**Introduction**  
---  
  
Etymologically syllabus means a "label" or "table of contents." The _American
Heritage Dictionary_ defines syllabus as outline of a course of study. We
agree that a syllabus should contain an outline, and a schedule of topics, and
many more items of information. However, we suggest that the primary purpose
of a syllabus is to communicate to one's students what the course is about,
why the course is taught, where it is going, and what will be required of the
students for them to complete the course with a passing grade.

Most of this paper will list suggestions from the literature about what
information might be included in your course syllabus. It is extremely
unlikely that you will include every listed. We suggest two criteria in
deciding what information to include. First, include all information that
students need to have _at the beginning of the course;_ second, include all
information that students need to have _in writing._ We believe that any
really important information about the course should be in writing. However,
it may be better to introduce some information later in the term, e.g., the
details of a required project. To attempt to include every single item of
importance in your syllabus is to insure that the student will not read much
of it.

To the experienced teacher, probably few of the items listed in this paper are
likely to come as a surprise. However, Lowther, Stark, and Martens (1989)
found in their interviews with faculty and in their examinations of syllabi
that "obvious" items were often omitted. At the very least we hope this paper
will provide the reader with a useful organization of what is already known.

In compiling the list of items of information that might be included in a
syllabus, we started with the unpublished article by the first author -- an
abbreviated version of which appeared in _The Teaching Professor_ (Altman,
1989). We found additional items in other publications (Birdsall, 1989;
Lowther, Stark,  & Martens, 1989; Millis, no date; Wilkerson & McKnight,
1978). There was surprising agreement about the major areas of information to
be included in a syllabus.  
  
**Major Content Areas of a Syllabus**  
  
**Course Information.** The first items of information in a syllabus should
give course information: _course title, course number,_ and _credit hours._
Also, are there any _prerequisites_? Is the _permission of the instructor_
required? Include the _location of classroom_ , and the _days and hours
class/lab/studio/etc. meets._

**Instructor Information.** Second, the students need information about the
instructor: _full name, title; office location_ (and where to leave
assignments), _office phone number; office hours._ Depending on the size of
the class (and other factors), it may be desirable to include an _emergency
phone number;_ quite often this can be the number of the department office.
Many instructors give the students their _home telephone number._ If you do,
it is well to also list restrictions, e.g., "No calls between 10:30 pm and
8:30 am please." If you are helped by _teaching assistants_ or other
instructors, their names, locations, and phone numbers should also be listed.

**Text, Readings, Materials.** College-level instruction -- at least in the
United States -- is heavily dependent upon the use of print material, if not a
required textbook, then a variety of readings. These are becoming increasingly
costly. The syllabus should provide the students with detailed information
about the following:

**Textbook(s)** \-- include the title, author, date (and edition), publisher,
cost, where available, (often it is appropriate to indicate why the particular
text was chosen and/or how extensively it will be used).

**Supplementary reading(s)** \- in addition to the detailed bibliographic
information about the readings, the syllabus should indicate whether the
readings are required or only recommended, and whether the readings are on
reserve in the library or available for purchase in the bookstore. Sometimes
instructors make their own books available to students. If this is the case
for the given course, that information might be included in the syllabus along
with whatever conditions apply to their use.

**Materials** \-- although many courses use only print material, there are a
myriad of courses that require additional -- something expensive -- materials,
e.g., lab or safety equipment, art supplies, special calculators or even
computers, etc.

**Course Descriptions/Objectives.** The treatment of this area -- variously
called course description, content, goals, objectives -- differ more than any
other in the publications we reviewed.

The bare minimum would be to repeat the _description in the college catalog_
\-- assuming that it describes the course with some accuracy. Certainly a
paragraph describing the _general content of the course_ \-- would not be
excessive. Information about _instructional methods_ , e.g., large lecture
with small discussion sections, may also be included here.

Some instructors, who have developed detailed instructional objectives,
include them in their syllabi. Such inclusion may result in information of
general _course goals_ (e.g., the learning and application of the general
principles of..., or the development of the skill..., or the development of a
more positive attitude toward...) can help orient the student to the purpose
of the course, the instructor's expectations, etc.

**Course Calendar/Schedule.** Some instructors are concerned that, if they
include a _daily - or weekly - schedule of topics_ to be covered, they can be
held legally liable if they depart from it. One remedy for this is to state
that the schedule is tentative and subject to change depending upon the
progress of the class. In many cases the instructor has only limited
flexibility about scheduling anyway, e.g., in a multi-section course where
departmental exams are administered on specific dates, or in a course which is
a prerequisite for another course (the material has to be -- should be \--
covered by the end of the course). If we expect students to meet our
deadlines, to plan their work, we must give them the information needed for
such planning.

The calendar or schedule should also include the dates for _exams, quizzes, or
other means of assessment._ (We are _not_ implying that all evaluation of
students must be in groups and at the same time. A course in college teaching
might require that the students be videotaped while teaching a class, so the
syllabus could say "to be scheduled individually.")

The calendar should also include _due dates for major assignments._ For
example, when is a paper due; if the topic has to be approved, when; if an
outline or draft is an interim step, when it is due.

Finally, any _required special events_ need to be included in the calendar,
e.g., a lecture by a visiting speaker, a dramatic or musical performance, a
field trip.

**Course Policies.** Every discussion of syllabi we read included something
about course policies, although what specifically was included varied. We
suggest the following topics:

**Attendance, lateness** \-- at least for freshman and sophomore classes, and
perhaps for all undergraduate classes, the syllabus should include some
statement about attendance (is it required, will students who attend regularly
be given a break if the grade is borderline?) and about lateness, at least if
it is penalized. (Students who arrive late disturb the class, but on some
campuses it is not possible for a student to get from one part of the campus
to another within the allotted time; sometimes our colleagues do not let
students leave promptly.)

**Class participation** \-- in the medieval lecture hall, class participation
was not an issue, but if students are to learn to apply, analyze, synthesize,
etc, they need to be active. Such approaches are contrary to the experiences
-- and preferences -- of many students. If active participation is expected,
the syllabus needs to say so. It also needs to to explain if/how participation
will be graded.

**Missed exams or assignments** \-- since these affect grades, they are of
interest to students. Syllabi should inform the students whether exams and
assignments can be made up; statements regarding earning extra credit should
also be included if that is an option.

**Lab safety/health** \-- in some courses these issues can literally be a
matter of life or death. Even is detailed materials are handed out early in
the course, the syllabus should include a short statement about the importance
of these issues and indicate that more detailed information will follow.

**Academic dishonesty** \-- in some syllabi this is treated as a separate
area. The syllabus should address questions related to cheating and
plagiarism. On campuses where these topics are treated in detail in a student
handbook, it is sufficient for the syllabus to simply refer the students to
that handbook. In the absence of such a resource, details in the syllabus are
necessary. Many students actually do not know what constitutes plagiarism. We
owe it to the students to explain what is considered to be plagiarism or
cheating.

**Grading** \-- this topic, even more that academic dishonesty, is often
treated as a separate area. Given the students' interest in graded, such
treatment is certainly defensible. Each syllabus should include details about
how the students will be evaluated \-- what factors will be included, how they
will be weighted, and how they will be translated into grades. Information
about the appeals procedures, often included in a student handbook, is also
appropriate at least for freshman and sophomore classes.

**Available Support Services.** Most college courses have available to the
students a considerable variety of instructional support services. We often
bemoan the fact that the students do not avail themselves of these services.
Perhaps this is because we do not draw their attention to the possibilities.
The _library_ is probably the oldest resource, and perhaps still the richest.
Include a brief statement in the syllabus identifying collections, journals,
abstracts, audio or video tapes, etc. which the library has which are relevant
to the course would be appropriate. If the institution has a _learning center_
, making the students aware of its services can be of real benefit to
students. In today's world _computers_ are becoming almost a necessity. Most
campuses have some terminals, if not personal computers, available for student
use. Many courses have other support services unique to them. Briefly describe
what is available in the syllabus, or tell the students where they can get
detailed information.  
  
**Beyond the Syllabus**  
  
While reading this paper it has undoubtedly occurred to many of you that our
suggestions often are based on certain assumptions about what is appropriate
for a course of what constitutes effective teaching. You are, of course,
correct. "Before the Syllabus" would really be a better title for this
section. If one of the main purposes of a syllabus is to communicate to the
students what the course is about, it presumes that we have some idea about
what we think the course should accomplish. It requires that we have _planned
the course._

Other than commenting generally on the content of the course, most writers do
not raise special questions about the underpinnings of the course. Lowther's
_et al._ (1989) _Preparing Course Syllabi for Improved Communication_ is a
significant exception. They list educational beliefs as a separate area,
including beliefs about students, beliefs about educational purpose, and
beliefs about the teaching role. This concern will come as not surprise to
those acquainted with the work of Stark, Lowther, and their colleagues at
NCRIPTAL studying course planning. In addition to the above publication, the
following are suggested for the reader who wishes to read on the topic in
depth (Peterson, Cameron, Mets, Jones  & Ettington, 1986; Start & Lowther,
1986; Stark, Lowther, Bentley, Ryan, Martens, Genthon, Wren, & Shaw, 1990;
Stark, Lowther, Ryan, Bomotti, Genthon, Haven, & Martens, 1988; Stark,
Lowther, Ryan, and Genthon, 1988; Stark, Shaw, and Lowther, 1989).

For readers wishing a single book, Diamond's (1988) _Designing and Improving
Courses and Curricula in Higher Education_ is a thorough one-volume treatment
on course design. For something even (79 pages), try Gronlund's (1985)
_Stating Objectives for Classroom Instruction_. For something very short, but
still thought provoking, complete the "Teaching Goals Inventory" in _Classroom
Assessment Techniques_ (Angelo  & Cross,, 1993).

First we -- individual instructors, faculty groups, curriculum committees --
must plan the course, must decide where we want the student to get to. Then
the syllabus is one way to tell the students which way they ought to go.  
  
  
  
**References** |  
Altman, H.B. (1989, May). Syllabus shares "What the Teacher Wants." _The
Teaching Professor_ , 3, 1-2.

Angelo, T.A., & Cross, K.P. (1993). _Classroom Assessment Techniques: A
Handbook for College Teachers_ (2nd ed.). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Birdsall, M. (1989). _Writing, Designing, and Using a Course Syllabus._
Boston: Northeastern University, Office of Instructional Development and
Evaluation.

Carroll, L. (1960). _Alice's Adventures in Wonderland and Through the Looking
Glass._ New York: Penguin Signet Classic.

Diamond, R.M. (1989). _Designing and Improving Courses and Curricula in Higher
Education: A Systematic Approach._ San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Gronlund, N.E. (1985). _Stating Objectives for Classroom Instruction_ (3rd
ed.). New York: Macmillan.

Lowther, M.A., Stark, J.S.,  & Martens, G.G. (1989). _Preparing Course Syllabi
for Improved Communication._ Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, National
Center for Research to Improve Post-secondary Teaching and Learning.

Millis, B.J. (no date). _Syllabus Construction Handbook._ College Park, MD:
University of Maryland, University College.

Peterson, M.W., Cameron K.S., Mets, L.A., Jones, P.,  & Ettington, D. (1986).
_The Organizational Context for Teaching and Learning: A Review of the
Research Literature._ Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, National Center for
Research to Improve Post-Secondary Teaching and Learning.

Ryan. M.P.,  & Martens, G.G. (1989). _Planning a College Course: A Guidebook
for the Graduate Teaching Assistant._ Ann Arbor: University of Michigan,
National Center for Research to Improve Post-Secondary Teaching and Learning.

Stark, J.S.,  & Lowther, M.A. (1986). _Designing the Learning Plan: A Review
of Research and Theory Related to College Curricula._ Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan, National Center for Research to Improve Post-Secondary Teaching and
Learning.

Stark, J.S., Lowther, M.A., Bentley, R.J., Ryan, M.P., Martens, G.G., Genthon,
M.L. Wren, P.A..  & Shaw, K.M. (1990). _Planning Introductory College Courses:
Influences on Faculty._ Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, National Center for
Research to Improve Post-Secondary Teaching and Learning.

Stark, J.S., Lowther, M.A. Ryan, M.P., Bomotti, S.S., Genthon, M., Haven,
D.L., and Martens, G. (1988). _Reflections on Course Planning: Faculty and
Students Consider Influences and Goals_. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan,
National Center for Research to Improve Post-Secondary Teaching and Learning.

Stark, J.S., Lowther, M.A., Ryan, M.P., and Genthon, M. (1988). Faculty
reflect on course planning. _Research in Higher Education,_ 29, 219-240.

Stark, J. S., Shaw, K.M.,  & Lowther, M.A. (1989). _Student Goals for College
and Courses: A Missing Link in Assessing and Improving Academic Achievement._
ASHE-ERIC Higher Education Report No. 6. Washington, DC: Association for the
Study of Higher Education.

Wilkerson, L.,  & McKnight, R.T. (1978). _Writing a Course Syllabus: A Self-
Study Packet for College Teachers._ Chicago: Michael Reese Hospital and
Medical Center.  
  
[![Teaching Tips Index](tips-but.gif)](teachtip.htm) [![Faculty
Guidebook](gui-but.gif)](/intranet/committees/FacDevCom/guidebk/guidebk.htm)
[![Faculty Home Page](fac-but.gif)](/intranet/committees/FacDevCom/index.htm)
[![Intranet Home Page](hcc-but.gif)](http://www.hcc.hawaii.edu/intranet)  

