#  History 110, Sections 01, 03, and 04  
MODERN WESTERN CIVILIZATION  
FALL l998

Instructor: Maurice P. Sneller  
Office: M. Ruffner 235  
Office Telephone: 395-2223  
Office Hours:    MWF and TT 3:30 and at your convenience

##  Contents

Course Description  
Required Text  
Course Objectives  
Class Schedule  
Course Requirements  
Grading  
Attendance Policy  
Research Paper  
Honor Code  
Term Paper Research Style Guide  
Plagiarism

###  **Course Description** :

A survey of the development of Modern Western Civilization from the Age of
Absolutism to the present, with emphasis upon the political, economic, social,
cultural, and intellectual attributes which have marked its rise to worldwide
influence in the Twentieth Century.

Return to Table of Contents

###  **_Text_** :

Spielvogel, Jackson J. _Western Civilization_. Vol. II, 3rd ed. Minneapolis/  
    St. Paul: West Publishing, 1997.

Return to Table of Contents  


###  **Course Objectives:**

Upon completion of the course, students will have gained an appropriate
increase in:

1\. knowledge and understanding of the forces which shaped Western history
since the seventeenth century.

2\. knowledge of historical study and methodology.

3\. understanding of the importance of ethical dilemmas in the shaping of
history.

4\. the ability to do historical research.

5\. the skills necessary to use a word processor.

 Return to Table of Contents  


###  **Class Schedule:**

**Test 1---Sept 17 or 18 (Th.) or (Fri.); Pages 528-671;** **Chapters 16-19**

**Subjects:**

Week 1 Chapter 16  
Aug.24-28  
Absolutism. Limited Monarchy. Constitutionalism. France of Louis XIV. Central,
Eastern, and Northern Europe. Mercantilism. Overseas Trade and Colonies. The
Balance Sheet of Imperialism.  


Week 2 Chapter 17  
Aug.31-Sept 4  
The Scientific Revolution. Technology. Nature, Reason, and Progress. The
Scientific Method. Science and Society.

Week 3 Chapter 18  
Sept.7-11  
Age of the Enlightenment. The Philosophes and Their Ideas. Arts and Letters in
the Eighteenth Century. The Doctrine of Progress. Toleration. Limits of the
Enlightenment.

Week 4 Chapter 19  
Sept.14-18  
Eighteenth-century Warfare. National States, International Wars. Economic,
Political, and Social Change. The Social Order of the Eighteenth Century.  
    


**Test 2--Oct. 8 (Th.) or 9 (Fri.); Pages 672-775;** **Chapters 20-22.**

**Subjects:**

Week 5 Chapter 20  
Sept.21-25  
The French Revolution, Napoleon, and Europe. Underlying Preconditions for
Revolution.  Financial Crisis and Noble Response. The Destruction of the Old
Regime. The Radical Revolution. Reaction and the Directory.  Napoleon. The
Consulate. The Empire and the European Response. Place of Napoleon in History.

Week 6 Chapter 21  
Sept.28-Oct 2  
The Industrial Revolution. Origins. Changes Technological and New Forms of
Industrial Organization. Science, Religion, and Philosophy. Social Impact of
the Industrial Revolution: Man, the State, and Society. Arts and Letters.

Week 7 Chapter 22  
Oct. 5-9  
Reaction, Revolution, and Romanticism, 1815-1850. The Conservative Order,
1815- 1830.Ideologies of change. Liberalism. Nationalism. Early Socialism.
Revolution and Reform, 1830-1850. Romanticism.  
    


**Test 3--Nov. 5 (Th.) or 6(Fri.); Pages 777-885; Chapters 23-25**

**Subjects** :

Weeks 8+9 Chapter 23  
Oct.14-23  
Age of Nationalism and Realism, 1850-1871. The France of Napoleon III. Italian
Unification. German Unification. The National State in Mid-Century. The
British Empire. Imperial Russia. Austrian Empire. United States.
Industrialization. Marxism. Realism and Cultural Life. Revolution in Health
Care.

Week 10 Chapter 24  
Oct.26-30  
Society and Politics, 1871-1914. Developing Industry. Technology. Urban
Environment. Social Structure. Socialist Movement. Domestic Politics of the
National State. Great Britain. France. Mediterranean Powers. Italy. Germany.
Austria-Hungary. Russia. United States.

Week 11 Chapter 25  
Nov. 2-6  
Imperialism and Culture in the "Age of Progress," 1871-1914. The Expansion of  
Europe. International Rivalry. Intellectual and Cultural Developments.
Science. Religion. Literature. Arts. Education.  
    


**Remainder--Pages 896-1063; Chapters 26-30.**

Week 12 Chapter 26  
Nov. 9-13 World War I. Nationalism. Militarism. War Movement. Industrial and
Geographical Balance. Politics, Society, and the Home Front. Outbreak of War.
Stalemate: 1914-1915.Decision on the Western Front. Total War. Impact of the
War. War and Revolution. Germany. Austria. Russia. Peace.

Weeks 13+14 Chapter 27  
Nov.16-27  
The Interwar World, 1919-1939. Search for Security. The Twenties. The Great
Depression. Democratic States: United States, Great Britain, France.
Authoritarian and Totalitarian States: Italy, Germany, Russia, Japan. Cultural
and Intellectual Trends.

Chapter 28  
The Road to War. New Warfare. Industrial and Geographical Balance. The Course
of World War II. Turning Point, 1942-1943. Last Years of the War. Emergence of
the Cold War.

    
Week 15 Chapter 29  
Nov. 33-Dec 7  
The Postwar World International Relations Since 1945. Confrontation in Europe
and Asia. Europe Since 1945. Containment: America in Vietnam. Culture in the
Postwar World.

Chapter 30 The End of the Twentieth Century. War and Peace in Asia. Europe and
Unity. World Economy. Toward the Twenty-first Century.

Return to Table of Contents

###  **Course Requirements:**

Three tests

Paper

Final comprehensive examination

Return to Table of Contents  


###  **Grading** :

During the semester there will be three tests and a final examination. Tests
will be worth approximately sixty (60) percent. The remaining forty (40)
percent will be the examination and a paper.(Note: Included in the above two
numbers will be five (5)percent for professionalism. This means class
attendance, fulfilling assignments on the scheduled date, arriving in class on
time, a willingness to learn, and consideration for other class members.) The
examination will be comprehensive in containing material from the beginning to
the end.

Return to Table of Contents  


###  **Attendance Policy** :

Logic says you should attend classes; the College _Catalog_ adds that absence
may impair academic performance. Being somewhat a realist, your instructor
knows that on occasion you may have to miss. For example, you may be
participating in a College-sponsored activity, be sick, or involved in a
recognizable emergency. While such reasons may exist, use caution in
exercising them, and make certain that you take your test early if there is a
field trip or athletic event creating a conflict.  
    
Do not miss a test or examination because there is little chance of a make-up.
If you request a make-up, be prepared to include an explanation for your
school absence from your doctor or appropriate College official. Even a rare
make-up must be taken within five calendar days from the originally scheduled
date. In a word, get the maximum reward for your study by taking the test when
it is scheduled.

**Note:** Other provisions in the College _Catalog_ may be enforced.

###  Return to Table of Contents

###  **Paper** :

You will have the opportunity to write a paper this semester. The instructor
will discuss suitable topics during the first class meeting. When you begin to
write, remember that important statements of fact should carry citations.
Quoted material should also indicate a source. By such means you avoid any
suspicion of plagiarism. Finally, style should conform to that in Kate L.
Turabian, _A Manual for Writers of Term Papers, Theses, and Dissertations._
The paper will be due on Thursday or Friday, September 24 or 25. A late paper
will lose value each calendar day. There are **_no_** acceptable excuses for
lateness. If you wish to be safe, hand in the paper early.

 The instructor will be happy to talk to you if you have any questions. His
office is Main Ruffner, Room 235.

Return to Table of Contents  


###  **Honor Code** :

Because trust and integrity are integral parts of an academic environment and
decent society, all work in the course will be your own. Write out and sign
the honor pledge when you hand in papers. (I have neither given nor received
any help on this test nor am I aware of any infraction of the Honor Code.)

Return to Table of Contents

###  Term Paper Research Style Guide

  Students should _NOT_ use the Longwood Style Manual or the MLA Style Sheet.
Thus, do _NOT_ use parenthetical notes. _Only_ _footnotes_ and _endnotes_ will
be acceptable! Please consult Kate L. Turabian, _A Manual for Writers._ 6th
ed.

Students should likewise never cite encyclopedias, textbooks, or class notes
in a term paper.

Students are permitted to cite only _one_ electronic document.

The following are some useful examples from Turabian:

Footnoting a book:      **1 Arthur Waley, _The Analects of Confucius_ (London:
George Allen and Unwin, l938), 33.**

  


If the same work by Waley is used again for the second footnote, Ibid. should
be used. Thus,      **2 Ibid., 37.** (Note that Ibid. is not underlined)

If Waley is cited later, after other works have been cited, students should
use a short title. Thus,      **17 Waley, _The Analects_ , 130.**

Footnoting a multi-volume work:      **3 Tucker Brooke, _The Renaissance_ ,
vol. 2 in _University of Chicago Readings in Western Civilization_ , ed. John
W. Boyer (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, l986), 402.**

Footnoting a Review:      **4 Steven Spitzer, review of _The Limits of Law
Enforcement_ , by Hans Zeisel, in _American Journal of Sociology_ 91 (November
l985): 726-29.**

Footnoting a Journal:      **8 Don Swanson, "Dialogue with a Catalogue,"
_Library Quarterly_ 34 (December l963): ll3-25.**

Electronic Documents      **56 Rosabel Flax, _Guidelines for Teaching
Mathematics K-12_ (Topeka: Kansas State Department of Education, 1979)
[database on-line]; available from Dialog, ERIC, ED 178312**

     **57 _Oxford English Dictionary_ , 2d ed., s.v. "glossolalia" [CD-ROM] (Oxford University Press, 1992).**
     **58 Joanne C. Baker and Richard W. Hunstead, "Revealing the Effects of Orientation in Composite Quasar Spectra," _Astrophysical Journal_ 452:L98, 20 October 1995 [journal on-line]; available from http://ww.aas.org/ApJ/v452n2/5309.html; Internet; accessed 29 September 1995.**

Footnoting a Magazine;      **9 Anne B. Fisher, "Ford Is Back on the Track,"
_Fortune_ , 23 December l985, l8.**

Footnoting a Newspaper:      **10 Michael Norman, "The Once-Simple Folk Tale
Analyzed by Academe," _New York Times_ , 5 March l984, p. l5**

Bibliography: Your bibliography should be entitled "Works Cited," and it
should only include works which you have cited in your footnotes/endnotes.

Examples of works cited:

Books:

**McDougall, Walter A. _The Heavens and the Earth: A Political History of the
Space_**      **_Age_. New York: Basic Books, l985.**

**________ . _The Moon_. New York: Basic Books, l987.**

Articles:

**Gibaldi, Joseph, ed. "Information for IEEE Authors." _IEEE Spectrum_ l2**
**(August l965): ll-15**.

Newspapers:

**Smith, Herbert. "U.S. Assumes the Israelis Have A-Bomb," _New York Times_
,**      **l8 July l970.**

Electronic Document:  
**Flax, Rosabel. _Guidelines for Teaching Mathematics K-12._ Topeka:**
**Kansas Department of Education, 1979. Database on-line. Available from**

  
**Dialog ERIC, ED 178312.**

Return to Table of Contents

###  _PLAGIARISM:_

Students should be reminded that the use of an author's ideas in a student
paper without giving proper credit to the author constitutes plagiarism.
Likewise the use of an author's words without placing those words in quotation
marks and providing proper citation is plagiarism. Students sometimes believe
that by changing an occasional word or two or even three in a sentence or
paragraph, they are avoiding plagiarism. This is _not_ the case! The
information and ideas taken from a source must be _re-formed into your own
words!_ And after re-forming it into your own words, you must use a footnote
or endnote giving proper credit to the author.

If your instructor suspects intentional or unintentional plagiarism, your
paper will be returned ungraded and you will be asked to bring your sources to
his office to verify the scholarship.

Return to Table of Contents

* * *

  
[Return to the Department Syllabus Page (Fall 1998)](Syllabi.htm#Fall 1998
Syllabi)

[Return to the Department of History and Political Science Homepage](Home.htm)  

* * *

