CONF 501



INTRODUCTION TO CONFLICT

ANALYSIS AND RESOLUTION



Semester:                     Fall 2000

Class Time:                 Mondays 4:30 to 7:10 p.m.

                                    Section 001                             Section 002

                                    ICAR Room A401                  Krug Hall Room 210



Instructors:                 Terrence Lyons                       Frank
Blechman

            703/993-1336                          703/993-3653

            tlyons1@gmu.edu                   fblechma@gmu.edu



Welcome to the course and to the Institute for Conflict Analysis and
Resolution.  This class is an introduction to the field of conflict analysis
and resolution.  As an introduction and as the first course that many at ICAR
will take, it is deliberately broad.  Other courses at ICAR develop one or
another of the themes in this introduction in greater depth.



This course examines definitions of conflict and diverse views of its
resolution and explores thinking about human behavior and social systems as
they relate to the origins of conflict and the role of conflict in violent and
peaceful social change.  It is designed to introduce you to academic thinking
about conflict analysis and resolution and to help you to think systematically
and analytically about conflict.



This course will be run as a seminar with an emphasis on discussion and
student presentations.  It is therefore imperative that students read the
assigned books and articles prior to class.  Active participation in class
discussions will be expected.



This is not a training course.  You are not being tested to see if you belong
at ICAR.  The agenda of this course is to build the foundation for you to work
together with the rest of us in the ICAR community and with those in the field
of conflict analysis and resolution.  This is the course at ICAR in which it
is most important for you to succeed.



_Course Requirements:_



In addition to regular attendance and participation, a take-home mid-term, an
analytical paper, a group presentation of a case study, and a take-home final
are required.



Participation, short in-class exercises, and the group case study presentation
will form the basis for 20 percent of the final grade.



The mid-term exam will account for 15 percent of the final grade.  This exam
will be handed out on October 11 and will be due on October 16.



A fifteen-page (double-spaced, approximately 4,000 word) analysis of a
conflict will form the basis for 30 percent of the grade.  This paper will be
due on November 13.



The final examination, which will cover material from throughout the class,
will form the basis of the final 35 percent of the grade.  This exam will be
handed out on December 4 and will be due December 18.



Delays, deferrals, or a grade of "incomplete" for the course will be given
only in cases of personal or immediate family crisis.



_Conflict Case Study Analysis_ : The analytical paper will analyze a conflict
case in fifteen, double-spaced pages (4,000 words).  Students will select one
of three cases to analyze.  A basic book that provides background to the case
is designated below and should be sufficient to provide the details of the
case.



The object of this paper is to reflect one's understanding of the tools of
conflict analysis covered in the first section of the class.  The assigned
book and an article or two will be sufficient to provide the narrative of the
case because the focus of the essay should be to demonstrate one's ability to
apply concepts of conflict analysis, rather than an in-depth knowledge of a
particular conflict.  These papers are due on November 13 and will be the
basis of 30 percent of the final class grade.  It is important that the papers
be handed in on time, prior to the group discussions and presentations.



Students will select and/or be assigned (in order to achieve rough balance in
group size) to one of the following three cases.



_South Africa:_



Patti Waldmeir, _Anatomy of a Miracle: The End of Apartheid and the Birth of
the New South Africa_ (New York: W. W. Norton and Co., 1997).



_Copper Strike_ :



Jonathan D. Rosenblum, _Copper Crucible: How the Arizona Miners? Strike of
1983 Recast Labor-Management Relations in America_ 2 nd ed. (Ithaca, N.Y.:
Cornell University Press, 1998).



Students may also enjoy Barbara Kingslover, _Holding the Line: Women in the
Great Arizona Mine Strike of 1983_ (Ithaca, N.Y.: ILR Press, 1989).





_1968 Washington Riots:_



Ben W. Gilbert, _Ten Blocks from the White House: Anatomy of the Washington
Riots of 1968_ (New York: Praeger, 1968).



After the papers are completed and turned in, each case will be the subject to
a group presentation.  The students in each case study group will be asked to
meet (time will be provided during class hours but additional meetings or
coordination by e-mail, phone, or other means may be necessary as well).  The
group will develop a plan to present its understanding of the case.  This may
represent a consensus among the group or alternative perspectives may be
present.  The group presentations (during weeks 12 and 13) will be 20 minutes
(time will be strictly enforced), followed by a 40-minute general discussion
in the class.



_Readings_ :



The following books are available for purchase at the Johnson Center
Bookstore.  All readings (including the books) are on reserve in the Johnson
Center Library and are also available in a binder in the "wormhole" at ICAR.



Jeffrey Z. Rubin, Dean G. Pruitt, and Sung Hee Kim, _Social Conflict:
Escalation, Stalemate, and Settlement_ (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994, 2 nd
edition).



Louis Kriesberg, _Constructive Conflicts: From Escalation to Resolution_
(Lanham, Md.: Rowman  & Littlefield, 1998).



Chester Crocker and Fen Osler Hampson with Pamela Aall, eds., _Managing Global
Chaos_ (Washington, D.C.: United States Institute of Peace Press, 1996).



I. William Zartman and Louis Rasmussen, eds., _Peacemaking in International
Conflict: Methods and Techniques_ (Washington, DC: United States Institute of
Peace, 1997).



John Paul Lederach, _Building Peace: Sustainable Reconciliation in Divided
Societies_ (Washington DC: United States Institute of Peace Press, 1997).



Hizkias Assefa and Paul Wahrhaftig, _The MOVE Crisis in Philadelphia:
Extremist Groups and Conflict Resolution_ (University of Pittsburgh Press,
1990).



Beth Roy, _Some Trouble with Cows: Making Sense of Social Conflict_ (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1994).

  

**Week One (August 28): Introduction to the Course**



This week will include self-introductions, definitions, a discussion of the
syllabus, course requirements, and expectations for the course.





**I.   Conflict Analysis **



**Week Two (September 11 - note no class on Labor Day): Defining Conflict and
the Field of Conflict Resolution**



**Meet in the Fenwick Conference Room, 2 nd Floor, Fenwick Library, for a
library orientation by Maureen Connors from 4:30-5:30.  The class will
reconvene in the regular classroom following the orientation.**



Rubin, Pruitt, and Kim, ch. 1-2



Kriesberg, ch. 1-3



Louis Kriesberg, "The Development of the Conflict Resolution Field," in
Zartman and Rasmussen, _Peacemaking in International Conflict: Methods and
Techniques_.



Johan Galtung, "Violence, Peace, and Peace Research," _Journal of Peace
Research_ 6:3 (1969): 167-91.  

** **

**Week Three (September 18): Sources of Conflict**



Mohammed Ayoob, "State Making, State Breaking, and State Failure," in Crocker
and Hampson _Managing Global Chaos_.



Ted Robert Gurr, "Minorities, Nationalists, and Ethnopolitical Conflict," in
Crocker and Hampson, _Managing Global Chaos_.



Janice Gross Stein, "Image, Identity, and Conflict Resolution," in Crocker and
Hampson, _Managing Global Chaos_.



John W. Burton, "Conflict Resolution as a Political Philosophy," in Dennis
J.D. Sandole and Hugo van der Merwe, eds., _Conflict Resolution Theory and
Practice: Integration and Application_ (Manchester, 1993).









**Week Four (September 25): Conflict Strategies and Dynamics of Escalation**



Rubin, Pruitt, and Kim, ch. 3-9



Kriesberg, ch. 4-7



**II.   Conflict Management**



**Week Five (October 2): Negotiations and Third Party Intervention**



Kriesberg, ch. 8-9



Rubin, Pruitt, and Kim, ch. 10-11



Jacob Bercovitch, "Mediation in International Conflict: An Overview of Theory,
A Review of Practice," in Zartman and Rasmussen, _Peacemaking in International
Conflict: Methods and Techniques_.



**Week Six (October 11 -- Special Wednesday Class): Timing and Stages**



#### Midterm exam will be handed out in class

** **

Harold Saunders, "Prenegotiation and Circum-negotiation: Arenas of the Peace
Process," in Crocker and Hampson, _Managing Global Chaos_.



Ronald J. Fisher and Loraleigh Keashly, "The Potential Complementarity of
Mediation and Consultation within a Contingency Model of Third Party
Consultation," _Journal of Peace Research_ 28:1 (1991): 29-42.



**Week Seven (October 16): Midterm due**



No assigned reading this week as students work on their midterms.



Movie: _Matewan_





# III.  OUTCOMES

** **

**Week Eight (October 23): Reconciliation**



John Paul Lederach, _Building Peace: Sustainable Reconciliation in Divided
Societies_ (USIP, 1997).



**Week Nine (October 30): Sustainability**



Kriesberg, ch. 10



**Week Ten (November 6): Conflict Analysis - Some Trouble with Cows**



Beth Roy, _Some Trouble with Cows: Making Sense of Social Conflict_ (Berkeley:
University of California, 1994).



Time will be made for group meetings at the end of class.



**Week Eleven (November 13): Conflict Analysis - The MOVE Crisis**

**
**

Hizkias Assefa and Paul Wahrhaftig, _The MOVE Crisis in Philadelphia:
Extremist Groups and Conflict Resolution_ (University of Pittsburgh Press,
1990).



Time will be made for group meetings at the end of class.



**Week Twelve (November 20): Case Study Group Presentations**



**Week Thirteen (November 27): Case Study Group Presentations**



**Week Fourteen (December 4): Review and Integrate**

** **

Kriesberg, ch. 11



Take home final will be distributed at the end of class.



**Final Exam Due December 18**

