**History 461: Studies in U.S. Diplomatic History  
** Fall 1997

Richard H. Immerman  
Gladfelter 923  
Immerman@vm.temple.edu  
office: (215) 204-7466  
home: (610) 645-5436  

For more than a decade the field of U.S. Diplomatic History, or what
practitioners prefer to call the History of U.S. Foreign Relations, has
undergone intense introspection and self-criticism. The objective has been to
reinvigorate the discipline by reducing the  "sterility" associated with the
Rankean tradition. Progress toward this achieving this goal is manifestly
apparent. Exploiting archives in many different lands and in many different
languages, contemporary scholars are asking new questions and applying
interdisciplinary methodologies and novel conceptual frameworks to their
investigations. These efforts have generated great excitement while at the
same time expanding the parameters of--some would argue transforming and even
redefining--the field itself. The end of the Cold War and fluidity of today's
international environment has provided further impetus to this phenomenon, as
has the release of new archives, primarily but not exclusively from behind the
previous Iron and Bamboo Curtains.

The intention of this course, accordingly, is to broaden your familiarity with
the historiography as well as the history of "modern" U.S. foreign relations.
To begin this process you will all become intimately acquainted with
_Explaining the History of American Foreign Relations_ (and the Hunt and
Leffler articles I distributed), a recently published collection of essays on
what the field is all about and how we might study it. It is neither a manual
nor recipe book. It should, however, stimulate your own thinking about what
has, should, and will be written. Each of you will select, or I will assign,
one of these  "think pieces," about which you will prepare a _five-to-ten-
minute_ oral presentation at our next-- _September 18_ \--meeting. You should
evaluate what you consider its pros and cons, and if possible, suggest what
(if any) subject areas you believe might lend themselves to the type of
approach recommended by the essay's author.

In the following class-- _September 25_ \--we will encounter core readings and
authors. Some represent prominent schools of interpretation and/or the output
of prominent scholars. Others reflect recent historiographic trends and
concerns. Today, each of you will select _one_ book from those listed for the
September 25 session and write a short (maximum two-page) review of it. For
assistance you should also read the preface from a long out-of-date reader and
Cummings essay I distributed. They will introduce you to what historians of
U.S. foreign relations mean when they refer to the orthodox (nationalist),
realist, revisionist, and postrevisionist schools of interpretation, and
suggest reasons for the controversies between them. Drawing on the essays for
context, you should prepare _five-to-ten minute_ oral presentations of your
_book reviews_.

_October 2_ will launch our chronological and topical tour of the history of
twentieth century U.S. foreign policy. We will focus most of our attention on
the Cold War era, but we will trace the evolution of the  "Wilsonian paradigm"
and touch on the implications of the end of the Cold War. Beginning with
October 2 and extending to the semester's end, _two_ or _three_ of you will
read, in addition to the book assigned to everyone, another one from the
appropriate session's list (see the bibliography I have posted on the
department web page at url: http://www.temple.edu/histdept/his461.html.). In
other words, for that week the  "chosen" will read _two_ books. They will in
_750 words_ review the selection (comparing it, when appropriate, to the one
we all read and any other works that come to mind).

These reviews will be the basis for an approximately _fifteen minute_ oral
presentation during which each presenter will seize the opportunity to
supplement his/her review by providing illustrations from the book or
otherwise to clarify or expand upon arguments. The hand-out on writing a book
review is a general guide--nothing more. Feel free to follow your own
instincts, as long as you don't end up with a book report. The only other
prohibition are _do not use the passive voice_ and your review should be
_free_ of all _typos_. _Copies_ of this and all other reviews should be made
for _each class member_. I will arrange to open a file at the circulation desk
at the TUCC library, where copies of the review should be deposited at least
_one hour_ (eg. by 4:15) _before_ our class meets.

This distribution and deadline is particularly critical for those in the class
who will be designated  "commentators." What this means is that, similar to
the convention at scholarly meetings, the commentators will take about _10
minutes_ to _analyze critically_ the review, pointing out the strengths and
weaknesses (of _both_ the review and the book) and posing questions about the
subject matter, arguments, methodolgy, etc.). Commentators will decide among
themselves which book each will critique. Because s/he probably will not have
read the works under review, I will, if necessary, inject points of
clarification.

Further clarification will be provided during the  "audience participation"
portion of the session that will follow the presentations. The "audience"
(class) will be well informed because everyone will have read the generally
assigned book and written a _one-  
page_ review of it (those reviewing the week's supplementary books must read
but _need not_ review the one assigned to everyone). I will grade all reviews
"excellent," "satisfactory" or "unsatisfactory" ("check +", "check", or "check
-"). Needless to say, failure to submit reviews on time will adversely affect
the quality of the commentaries and general discussion, and thus I will not
take kindly to such behavior.

The final assignment will be a comparative review of _four_ books from the
bibliography ( _excluding_ those _already reviewed_ in class). It should
probably run _eight to twelve pages_. The selections should, of course, be
related to one another in some manner, and I encourage you to premise your
choices on a theme, topic, constituency, or even individual that interests you
and/or is valuable for your area of research. For this reason let's agree that
you will bounce your proposals off me. Because the papers will be _due_ (and I
mean it) _Saturday, December 13_ (I hope we can celebrate at my house), you
should make an appointment with me, either here or at the Main Campus, no
later than _November 13_. At this time we can also discuss your performance
and progress.

As a general guideline I will base your course grade on an even division
between your written and oral work. I may reward exceptional performance in
one area by giving it extra weight in my computations, but don't count on it.
Hence never rest on your laurels. And FYI, I am a fanatic when it comes to
class participation. The success of any graduate course is a function of the
collective contributions of everyone. If you are uncomfortable speaking out,
or for that matter encounter any other problems, see me sooner rather than
later. Under any circumstances, feel free to check with me whenever the spirit
moves you.

__

_Required Reading_ (available at TUCC Bookstore)

Hogan, Michael & Thomas Paterson, _Explaining the History of American Foreign
Relations_

Ambrosius, Lloyd, _Wilsonian Statecraft_

Cohen, Warren, _Empire Without Tears_

Dallek, Robert, _Franklin D. Roosevelt_

Woods, Randall & Howard Jones, _Dawning of the Cold War_

Harper, John, _American Visions of Europe_

Chang, Gordon, _Friends and Enemies_

Stueck, William, _The Korean War_

Immerman, Richard, _John Foster Dulles_

Paterson, Thomas, _Kennedy's Quest for Victory_

Cohen, Warren & Nancy Tucker, _Lyndon Johnson Confronts the World_

Smith, Tony, _America's Mission_

*Sundry distributed articles and essays

_Schedule of Sessions_

_September 8_ **Introduction**

_September 15_

__

__Class Reading: Hogan & Paterson (Hunt/Leffler)

Reviews: Selected Essays

Commentaries: Everyone

_September 22_

Class Reading: "Preface"/Cummings Article

****

****

Reviews: Dallek, _American Style of Foreign Policy_

DeConde, _Ethnicity, Race, and American Foreign Policy_

Gardner, _Covenant with Power_

Heald, Morrell and L. Kaplan, _Culture and Diplomacy_

LaFeber, _Inevitable Revolutions_

Jeffreys-Jones, _Changing Differences_ __

__ Khong, _Analogies at War_

__ Kennan, _American Diplomacy_

Kolko, _Roots of American Foreign Policy_

__ Kunz, _Butter and Guns_

Lundestad, _The American "Empire"_

McCormick, _America's Half-Century_

Morgenthau, _Politics Among Nations_

Perkins, _Foreign Policy and the American Spirit_

Rosenberg, _Spreading the American Dream_

Tannenbaum, _The American Tradition in Foreign Policy_

Trachtenberg, _History and Strategy_

Williams, _Tragedy of American Diplomacy_ __

__

Commentaries: Everyone

_September 29_

Class Reading: Ambrosius

Reviews: Fogelsong, _America's Secret War_

Knock, _To End All Wars_

__ Levin, _Wilson and World Politics_

Commentaries:

_October 6_ ****

****

****Class Reading: Cohen ****

****

Reviews: Castigliola, _Awkward Dominion_

Dingman, _Power in the Pacific_

Schuker, _End of French Predominance_

Commentaries:

__

__

__

__

_October 13_ ****

****

****Class Reading: Dallek ****

****

****Reviews: Heinrichs, _Threshold of War_

Iriye, _Power and Culture_

Kolko, _Politics of War_

Commentaries:

_October 20_

Class Reading: Woods & Jones ****

Reviews: Gaddis, _Now We Know_

Hogan, _Marshall Plan_

__ Leffler, _Preponderance of Power_

__

__Commentaries:

_October 27_

Class Reading: Harper

Reviews: Eisenberg, _Drawing the Line_ ****

Schwartz, _America's Germany_

Wagnleitner, _Coca-Colonization_

Commentaries: __

__

__

__

__

_November 3_

Class Reading: Chang ****

Reviews: Christensen, _Useful Allies_

Westad, _Cold War and Revolution_

Zhang, _Deterrence and Strategic Culture_

Commentaries:

_November 10_

Class Reading: Stueck

Reviews: Chen, _China's Road to the Korean War_

Foot, _The Wrong War_

Cumings, _Origins of the Korean War_ , vol.1

Commentaries:

__

_November 17_

Class Reading: Immerman (Rabe article)

Reviews: Cobbs, _The Rich Neighbor Policy_

__ Freiberger, _Suez Crisis_

McMahon, _Cold War on the Periphery_

__

Commentaries:

_November 24_ :

Class Reading: Paterson

Reviews: Beschloss, _The Crisis Years_

Nathan, _Cuban Missile Crisis_

Higgins, _Perfect Failure_

Commentaries:

_December 1_

Class Reading: Cohen & Tucker

Reviews: Buzzanco, _Masters of War_

Herring, _LBJ and Vietnam_

Kahin, _Intervention_

Commentaries:

_December 8_ :

Class Reading: Smith

Reviews: Garthoff, _Great Transition_

McDougall, _Promised Land, Crusader State_

Ninkovich, _Modernity and Power_

Commentaries:

