### History 770  
Studies in Diplomatic History, 1945 to the Present

_Instructor_ : Dr. Peter Hahn



_Course description_ : The purpose of this course is to familiarize students
with the literature on the history of American foreign relations from 1865 to
1945 and the major schools of thought and interpretive approaches in the
field. To accomplish this task, the class will read a substantial number of
historiographical articles and hear reports on some 40 books. The
historiographical articles will help us understand how the discipline has
evolved, enable us to put our reading in a larger perspective, and introduce
us to books and essays not read by class members. Reading and discussion of
individual books will enlighten us to the strengths and weaknesses of
particular approaches. Each member of the seminar should learn to think like a
historian, specifically a diplomatic historian, and to recognize the different
ways in which specialists approach the discipline.



_Course requirements_ : Each student must complete a substantial amount of
reading, including common readings and approximately 10 books to be assigned
individually. Each member of the seminar will write reports of several of the
individually-assigned books and present the reports in class. Moreover, each
student will have at least one opportunity to serve as discussion leader and
will be expected to participate actively in discussions. This reading and
discussion course can succeed only if each member does both.

In addition to all of this, each class member must read several books
concentrating on a topic of his or her choosing, and write a longer,
historiographical essay that summarizes and comparatively analyzes those
books.



_Reports_ : Four to six books will be assigned to the same number of students
for each class meeting. Assignments will be made as far in advance as
possible. Those students assigned to read a book should compose reports on
their books. Reports should number 4 to 5 pages, typed and single-spaced. Each
report should provide a cogent summary of the book's narrative details (scope,
contents, period, topics, issues, etc.) and its interpretive approach (3-4
pages). It should also summarize what reviews published in major journals have
said about the book, relate the book to the common readings for the week, and
clarify the student's own judgment of the book's merits and demerits (1-2
pages). Bibliographic information should appear at the top of page 1.

Reports are due at 4:00 pm sharp on the Friday preceding the class in which
the book is assigned. A copy should be placed in the mailboxes of every other
student and me. Unexcused delays in submitting papers will result in an
automatic reduction of one letter grade on the report.



_Discussion of books_ : Reporters for each class should meet informally for
approximately one hour prior to the class. At this meeting they should discuss
the differences and similarities among the works they have read and relate
these works to the common readings. They must also devise a teaching strategy
for the collective presentation of the books to the class and for the
facilitation of discussion that will follow. During class, each reporter will
be allowed _five minutes_ to present a summary of his or her report,
emphasizing the interpretive similarities and differences between the assigned
book and other literature on the subject. I will designate one member of the
reporting group as the group leader, and this person will be responsible for
running the group meeting and the class discussion. That is, the leader will
direct discussion and keep it on track. Discussion should avoid narrative
details and focus on the conceptual ideas, methodologies, and analytical
models revealed in the books under study.

Students not part of the reporting group are expected to read carefully the
common readings and the book reports and to come to class prepared to ask
questions, make comments, and contribute to vigorous discussion.



_Long paper_ : The long paper should be based on four to six books that
address a single issue or topic in U.S. diplomatic history of interest to the
student. In most cases the books should be drawn from the course reading list.
Like the reports, the long paper should summarize very briefly the books'
narrative details (scope, contents, period, topics, issues, etc.), and it
should discuss at greater length their interpretive approaches. It should
comparatively analyze the books, clarify the student's own judgment of the
books' strengths and weaknesses, identify schools of interpretation of the
historical issue under study, and, when possible, account for variations among
the authors examined.

The long paper should number 25-30 pages, typed and double- spaced. More
details about this assignment will be provided in class. Deadline for the long
paper is 4:00 pm on Friday, March 14. Early submissions are encouraged.



_Class meetings_ : The class will meet every Monday from 1:30 to 3:30 pm.



_Method of determining final grade_ : Each final grade will be determined as
follows:

    
    
         Reports        30%
         Discussion     40%
         Long paper     30%
    
    

Students who fail to complete any portion of assigned work should not expect
to receive a passing grade. Excessive tardiness or absence from class meetings
could lower a final grade by one letter.



_Course policies_ : All students must be officially enrolled in the course by
the end of the second full week of the quarter. No requests to add the course
will be approved by the department chair after that time. Enrolling officially
and on time is solely the responsibility of the student.

In the event that a student cannot attend a meeting, he or she should notify
me as far in advance as possible. Written work that is turned in late will be
penalized. Rare exceptions might be made but these must be approved by me in
advance of the due date.

