### History 583.01  
UNITED STATES DIPLOMACY FROM INDEPENDENCE TO 1900



_Course Description_ : In this course we will study United States foreign
policy prior to 1900. During this time period, the United States grew from a
small republic nestled along the eastern seaboard of central North America to
a vast empire that spanned the continent, exerted substantial influence in the
Caribbean Basin, and reached across the Pacific Ocean to the edge of Asia.
Accordingly, the central theme of the course is American territorial and
commercial expansion. We will comparatively analyze competing visions for
expansion advocated by various Americans; explore the domestic economic,
intellectual, and political wellsprings of expansionism; examine the methods
used to extend the nation's borders, commerce, and influence; and seek to
understand the effect of expansion on the nation's values, institutions, and
history. Lectures and readings will introduce you to historical controversies
and conflicting interpretations, which you will be expected to analyze
critically in writing and discussions.



_Academic Objectives_ : From this course you should gain the following skills:

  1. To develop the ability to assess and think critically about historical issues and how people interpret those issues; 
  2. To gain a basic factual knowledge of this historical period; 
  3. To develop some skills in analyzing historical data and reaching informed conclusions about those data. 



_Required Books_ : The following books are _required_ reading and should be
available at the bookstores.

  1. LaFeber, Walter. _The American Age: U.S. Foreign Policy at Home and Abroad_ , 2nd ed. (You should acquire either (a) _Volume 1: to 1920_ or (b) the combined two volume edition subtitled _1750 to the Present_ ) 
  2. Dull, Jonathan. _A Diplomatic History of the American People_
  3. Brown, Roger H. _The Republic in Peril: 1812_
  4. Graebner, Norman A. _Empire on the Pacific: A Study in American Continental Expansion_
  5. Beisner, Robert L. _From the Old Diplomacy to the New, 1865-1900_ , 2nd ed. 



_Meetings_ : Classes will meet every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday from 11:30
am to 12:48 pm. Attendance is mandatory at all class meetings. Attendance will
be taken five times, at random, during the quarter, and you will earn one
point for each time you are recorded present.

_Enrollment_ : All students must be officially enrolled in the course by the
end of the second full week of the quarter. No requests to add the course will
be approved by the department chair after that time. Enrolling officially and
on time is solely the responsibility of the student.

_Examinations_ : The midterm exam will be given during class on Monday,
October 30 and the final exam will be administered from 11:30 am to 1:18 pm on
Monday, December 4. Both exams will cover material from lectures and assigned
readings and will consist primarily of essay questions. The final exam will be
comprehensive. You will NOT be permitted to consult books, notebooks, or other
aids during the exams. Any student with an unexcused absence from an exam will
earn an E for that test. The time and place of the graduating seniors' exam
will be announced in class as soon as it can be scheduled.

_Make-up exam policy_ : If for any family or medical reason you find it
absolutely necessary to miss an examination, you must contact me before the
exam and have my consent to your absence if you wish to take a make-up exam.
The date and time of any make-up exam will be announced in class.

_Essay_ : You must complete one out-of-class writing assignment. The
assignment will be distributed during the first week of class and will be due
Monday, October 9. Early submissions are welcome. Papers turned in late will
be assessed penalties of a half letter grade per day late; papers will not be
accepted after Friday, October 13. To be fair to all students, exceptions to
this rule will not be granted. More details on this assignment will be
provided in class.

_Method of determining final grade_ :

    
    
       Attendance 5%       Essay 30%
       Midterm exam 25%    Final exam 40%
    

If you are a graduate student enrolled for credit in this course, in addition
to completing these assignments you must write an historiographical essay, on
a topic to be negotiated with me, worth 10% of your quarter grade and due
Monday, November 27.

_Other expectations_ : Given the size of this class, your fellow students
depend on your cooperation in maintaining a classroom environment conducive to
learning. Late arrivals, early departures, and other disruptive behaviors are
strongly discouraged. On the other hand, you are encouraged to ask questions
and raise substantive issues at all times.

You are expected to maintain the highest standards of academic honesty and
integrity. Cheating, plagiarizing, or practicing other forms of dishonesty
will not be tolerated and, consonant with university regulations, may result
in failure of the course.

_Suggestions_ : If you do not understand a course requirement or course
material, please ask about it. I am here to help you and welcome opportunities
to answer your questions.

If you do not understand the grading of your examination, please seek
clarification at the earliest opportunity.

Consider the following suggestions to assist you in writing essay exams:

  1. Always relate exam points to time. If the exam has three sections of equal value, apportion your time equally. DO NOT spend longer on one of the sections than the percent of the grade justifies. 
  2. Before beginning to write, outline your essay to ensure orderliness as you write. Then compose an essay including an introduction, a body of several paragraphs, and a brief concluding paragraph. Following this advice rather than writing down thoughts as they come to mind will help you produce an organized, coherent essay. 
  3. Remember that the prime concern of history is to analyze change over time. When, why, and how the changes occurred and the significance of the changes to American history are central questions in this course. Bear this in mind as you take notes, read, and review. 
  4. You should succeed on the exams in general proportion to the time and effort you invest in studying. If this does not happen on the midterm, please talk to me at once. 



_Schedule of assignments_ : Lectures and assignments are _tentatively_
scheduled below. Each class will consist primarily of lecture, but ample time
will be reserved for questions and discussion. Please be prepared to make
thoughtful contributions to each class. Readings are assigned on a weekly
basis. You are expected to familiarize yourself with the topics of reading
assignments and complete them in conjunction with the appropriate lectures.

    
    
       Sep. 20   Introduction to the course
            22   Origins of American Empire
                    READINGS: LaFeber, 3-17; Dull, xi-xii, 3-39
    
            25   Diplomacy of the American Revolution I
            27   Diplomacy of the American Revolution II
            29   The Confederation
                    READINGS: LaFeber, 18-39; Dull, 43-174
    
       Oct.  2   Problems of the 1790s
             4   John Adams, 1797-1801
             6   Jeffersonian Diplomacy, 1801-09
                    READINGS: LaFeber, 40-58
    
             9   _ESSAYS DUE_
                 Origins of the War of 1812
            11   The War of 1812
            13   James Monroe, 1817-25
                    READINGS: LaFeber, 58-83; Brown, vii-viii, 1-196
    
            16   The Monroe Doctrine
            18   Manifest Destiny to the 1840s
            20   The Mexican-American War
                    READINGS: LaFeber, 82-126; Graebner, vii-xvi, 1-228
    
            23   Britain and the Acquisition of Oregon, 1812-1848
            25   Manifest Destiny in the 1850s
            27   _REVIEW FOR MIDTERM EXAM_
                    READINGS: LaFeber, 130-45
    
            30   _MIDTERM EXAM_
       Nov.  1   The Civil War I
             3   The Civil War II
                    READINGS: LaFeber, 145-56
    
             6   Aftermath of the Civil War
             8   Expansionism of William H. Seward
            10   VETERANS DAY HOLIDAY
                    READINGS: LaFeber, 157-71
    
            13   "Gilded Age" Diplomacy
            15   The New Consensus on Expansionism
            17   Domestic Roots of the New Consensus
                    READINGS: LaFeber, 171-91; Beisner, 1-157
    
            20   Latin America in the 1890s
            22   Origins of the Spanish-American War
            24   THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY
                    READINGS: LaFeber, 193-202
    
            27   The Spanish-American War
            29   The New Empire and its Critics
       Dec.  1   REVIEW FOR FINAL
                    READINGS:  LaFeber, 202-31
    
    
       _December 4 (Monday)  FINAL EXAM    11:30 am-1:18 pm_
    
    

