![](centlogo_top.JPG)

|  ![](ceelogo.GIF)

![](willis.jpg)

[Dr. Becky Willis](http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~emw4/)  
  
---|---  
**ETC 557** |  **Technology Integration in the  
Elementary Classroom**  
[ Class](http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~emw4/etc557/class/index.html) |
[Syllabus](http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~emw4/etc557/class/syllabus.html) |
[Start](http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~emw4/etc557/class/start.html) |
[Communicate](http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~emw4/etc557/class/comm.html) |
[Library](http://www.nau.edu/cline) |
[Help](http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~emw4/etc557/class/help.html)  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
  


# Syllabus

If you have registered and this is your first time in the class, you should:

  1. Make sure you meet the technical requirements listed on the [help page](http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~emw4/etc557/class/help.html) and [get the required plug-ins](http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~emw4/etc557/class/help.html).
  2. Read [Getting Started](http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~emw4/etc557/class/start.html)[ ](http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~emw4/etc547/start.html) to learn how the course will be delivered.
  3. Look at the [overview](http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~emw4/etc557/class/overview.html) of the course.

Then read the
[syllabus](http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~emw4/etc557/class/syllabus.html), enter the
[class](http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~emw4/etc557/class/index.html),
[communicate](http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~emw4/etc557/class/comm.html) with others
in the class, view additional resources from [Cline
Library](http://www.nau.edu/cline/), or [get technical
help](http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~emw4/etc557/class/help.html).

* * *

[Expectations for Students Enrolled in the
Course](http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~emw4/etc557/class/expect.html)

[Grading](http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~emw4/etc557/class/grading.html)

**Course Description** **:**

This course is designed to provide educators with the opportunity and tools to
examine and reflect on alternative ways to plan, organize, and implement
classroom instruction that integrates technology in the elementary curriculum.
It is planned as a course for teachers beginning graduate study in curriculum
and instruction, who are interested in or working at the elementary level, as
well as an update for educators interested in recent research and innovative
practice in the integration of technology in the K-8 classroom.

Toward achieving the purpose of this course, students will engage in projects
and discussions, readings, and written assignments leading to the attainment
of the following goals and objectives in the use of technology in the
elementary curriculum. Goals and objectives reflect standards established by
the [International Society for Technology in Education](http://www.iste.org).

![](bluestem.gif)

**Goals** : Students will:

\- Have knowledge of theory and research as it applies to educational
technology and the elementary curriculum.

\- Have an understanding of the use of technology and how to integrate
technology as tools in the culturally, linguistic, and physically diverse
learning environment, especially those related to assistive technology needs.

\- Have knowledge of the impact technology has on society.

\- Have knowledge of the difference between teaching about technology and
teaching with technology.

\- Have an understanding of the impacts of technology in education especially
in relation to changing teacher roles, changing student/teacher relations,
changing learning environments and values in the elementary curriculum.

![](bluestem.gif)

**Objectives** : Specific objectives established for the course to facilitate
the student's achievement of the course goals include:

\- The student will demonstrate the ability to design an integrated computer
using curriculum based on the use of both thematic, problem-centered and
inquiry-based approaches. Functional knowledge will be demonstrated by the
successful completion of projects and activities.

\- The student will demonstrate the ability to design an integrated computer
using elementary curriculum which incorporates a variety of instructional
strategies including contracts, and whole, small, individual, and cooperative
groupings. Functional knowledge will be demonstrated by the appropriate
integration of these strategies into the successful completion of projects and
activities.

\- The student will demonstrate the ability to use a variety of computer
applications including telecommunications, word processing, desktop
publishing, graphics programs, databases, and hypermedia programs. Functional
knowledge will be demonstrated by the successful completion of course projects
using these applications.

\- The student will be able to integrate these computer applications into the
design of an elementary curriculum. Functional knowledge will be demonstrated
by the appropriate integration of these strategies into the successful
completion of projects and activities.

\- The student will develop awareness of the relationship between studied
models and strategies and the needs of students in a multicultural setting.
Awareness will be enhanced through readings, class discussions, class
participation, and the appropriate integration of this awareness into the
successful completion of projects and activities.

\- The student will develop knowledge of the social and ethical impacts of
technology. Knowledge will be developed through participation in class
projects and discussions centering on related social and ethical issues.

\- The student will develop knowledge of resources which support staying
current in applications and practices about effective computer using
curriculums and standards in the elementary environment, as well as strategies
for accessing those resources. Knowledge will be developed through use of
online database searches and community outreach for locating resources on
topics related to technology in the elementary classroom.



Successful completion this course prepares students with the NCATE/ISTE
Recommended Foundations in Technology for All Teachers (1.0-1.3.5) and partial
fulfillment of the Educational Computing and Technology Literacy-Endorsement
(2.0-3.1.13).

* * *

**Modules**

**Technology Integration in the Elementary Classroom is divided into 3
modules. To complete the course successfully, complete the modules in the
order shown below:**

  1. [Building Communities of Learners](http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~emw4/etc557/class/community/index.html)
  2. [Designing Learning Environments](http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~emw4/etc557/class/environment/index.html)
  3. [Planning for Lifelong Learning](http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~emw4/etc557/class/lifelong/index.html)

* * *

![](bookturn.gif)

[ Class](http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~emw4/etc557/class/index.html) |
[Syllabus](http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~emw4/etc557/class/syllabus.html) |
[Start](http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~emw4/etc557/class/start.html) |
[Communicate](http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~emw4/etc557/class/comm.html) |
[Library](http://www.nau.edu/cline) |
[Help](http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~emw4/etc557/class/help.html)  
---|---|---|---|---|---

