|  ![](gifs/eng1.jpg)  
---  
![](gifs/bar.jpg)  
![](gifs/gmu.jpg)  
![](gifs/bar.jpg)  
|  [![](gifs/home.gif)](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/index.html)  
[![](gifs/announce.gif)](http://mason.gmu.edu/~english)  
[![](gifs/undergrad.gif)](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/undergrad.html)  
[![](gifs/grad.gif)](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/graduate.html)  
[![](gifs/faculty.gif)](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/faculty.html)  
[![](gifs/gened.gif)](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/gened.html)  
[![](gifs/courses.gif)](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/courses.html)  
[![](gifs/links.gif)](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/links.html) |
![](gifs/bar1.gif)  
---|---  
|  Descriptions of course offerings are now available for:

[**Undergraduate**
](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/fall01courses.html#Undergraduate)

[**Graduate**
](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/fall01courses.html#Graduate)

* * *

**[100s](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/fall01courses.html#100s) ，
[200s](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/fall01courses.html#200s) ，
[300s](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/fall01courses.html#300/400) ，
[400s](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/fall01courses.html#400) ，[
500s(grad)](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/fall01courses.html#500) ，
[600s](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/fall01courses.html#600) ，
[700s](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/fall01courses.html#700)**

**[Linguistics
(undergrad)](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/fall01courses.html#ling\(ug\))
， [Linguistics
(grad)](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/fall01courses.html#ling\(g\))**

**[Linguistics Home](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/ling/ling.html) **

* * *

**Undergraduate**

**INTRODUCTION**

This booklet describes the required English courses you are going to take as
well as other courses many students choose as English electives.

If you're an English major, you already know the advantages of a background in
English. Schools of business, medicine, and law, while requiring courses
appropriate to their disciplines, welcome the kind of literate, insightful
student that a major in English encourages. Your advisor or anyone in the
English Department will gladly amplify this statement and discuss possible
courses of study to fit your needs.

If you're not an English major, we still hope you will take English courses as
electives. Majors from many other disciplines have taken and enjoyed our
classes in the past; we look forward to their doing so in the future. We also
hope that this booklet presents material and teaching approaches you find
attractive and that you will find our offerings enlightening and instructive.

Majors, please note the following key to concentrations:

**C = Concentration**

**BAL = 18 th and 19th Century British and American**

**TCL = 20 th-Century**

**CST = Cultural Studies**

**CW = Creative Writing**

**DRA = Drama**

**FIC = Fiction**

**FML = Folklore, Mythology and Literature**

**FMS = Film and Media Studies**

**GS = Gender Studies**

**LIN = Linguistics**

**MRL = Medieval and Renaissance**

**NWE = Nonfiction Writing and Editing**

**POE = Poetry**

**Core Courses for:**

**Pre-1800**

335, 336, 345:001, 400, 404, 474

**Pre-1915 Amer/Brit/World**

335, 336, 345:002, 368, 400, 404, 407, 414:002, 425, 436, 459, 474

**Non-canonical/Minority**

333, 363, 368, 371, 368, 371, 414:001, 449, 490, 491, 493

**English Composition 100, 101**

Because the ability to write well is so important to success in the University
and in professional careers, George Mason requires that its students complete
two semesters of English composition (101 or 100) and 302\. All students must
enroll in English 101 (or 100) upon their admission unless they have received
credit for this course through transfer or proficiency examination.

**English 101 Composition (3)**

Instructors of Composition know that writers develop by writing and informed
rewriting. Students write a minimum of 3500 words that receive instructor
comment. The course stresses expository and argumentative techniques,
practiced through in-class and out-of class assignments. Journals, informal
in-class writings, and essays of varying length and complexity are typical
modes of writing assigned. Teachers employ a variety of methods; lectures,
discussions, conferences, workshops and peer response groups are methods used
in most sections. All students in English 101 **_learn to use the research
library_** and receive at least one week of lab instruction in the use of
electronic sources. Students must complete a research project. A student must
earn a minimum grade of  "C" in order to pass English 101.

**English 100 Composition for Non-Native Speakers (4)**

This 4-credit course meets the same objectives and uses methods and
assignments similar to those in English 101. An extra class meeting per week
allows more intensive work on writing problems typically encountered by
students whose first language is not English.

**English 200 Level courses**

**PREREQUISITES**

As a prerequisite to 200-level courses, students must complete 3 credits of
Composition (English 100 or 101). The English Department offers a number of
courses on the two-hundred level to fulfill the literature requirement in the
University. _Students entering under the 1997-1998 catalog or later must take
201 as a prerequisite to other 200-level courses. Other students are
encouraged but not required to take ENGL 201 first._ The courses are designed
to broaden your awareness of cultural context, to familiarize you with
literature and literary techniques you may not have previously studied, and to
consider basic questions of language, value and culture.

**Engl 201 Reading Texts (3)**

Close analysis of texts, including but not limited to poetry, fiction and
drama. We emphasize reading and writing exercises to develop basic
interpretive skills. English 201 examines figurative language, central issues,
the relationship between structure and meaning, narrative point of view, and
other essential techniques of critical reading.

**Engl 202 Texts and Contexts**

Prerequisites: Engl 201 or permission of Department

Study of texts within the framework of culture. Each section chooses a theme,
under which literary works are studied within such categories as history,
gender, religion, race, class, and nation. Engl 202 builds on reading and
writing skills taught in English 201.

**English 202 Course Titles**

**<http://mason.gmu.edu/~sremicks/Engl202.html>**

**Engl 203 Western Literary Masterworks, I (3)**

The readings of this course range from the Old Testament to the writings of
Montaigne. Texts will include: Greek epic and tragedy, Medieval epic, romance
and saga, and essays and tales from the Renaissance. Builds on reading and
writing skills taught in English 201\.

**Engl 204 Western Literary Masterworks, II (3)**

English 204 continues and brings up to the 21st Century the literary survey
begun by English 203. We'll examine the works of writers from French neo-
classical to work by modern novelists and playwrights such as Dostoyesvsky,
Mann, and Chekhov. Builds on reading and writing skills taught in English 201.

**ENGL209 Enhanced Digital Text (1)**

Co-requisite: one course from Engl100-499

001 TR 0300-0415pm **meets 8/28-9/20 only**

002 TR 0300-0415pm **meets 9/25-10/23 only**

003 TR 0300-0415pm **meets 10/30-11/27 only**

Thompson

An introduction to digitally enhanced texts. Learn to write in an electronic
environment and create basic hypertext documents incorporating links, targets,
images and other types of media related to English studies. This is a 4 week,
1 credit course and should be taken with another class (preferably in English)
in which you have written something you can electronically enhance.

[Back to top](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/fall01courses.html#top)

**English 300 and 400 level Courses**

**PREREQUISITES**

As a prerequisite to all 300 and 400 level courses, students must complete 3
credits of Composition (ENGL 100 or 101) and 3-6 credits of English 200 level
courses as required by the student's degree program.

**Engl 302 Advanced Composition (3)**

Note: English 302 completes the composition requirement for all students at
George Mason University. As a prerequisite to English 302, a student must have
completed 45 credit hours, including 3 credits of composition (Engl 101 or
100) and 6 credits of literature are required as part of the general education
requirements for the student's degree program. Three of 6 credits of
literature may be taken concurrently with 302.

Students in this course gain extensive practice in writing and analyzing such
expository forms as the essay, article, proposal, and technical or scientific
report. Particular sections of English 302 are designated for students within
majors in the following broad areas: _humanities (H)_ , _natural science (N)_
, _social sciences (S)_ , and _business (B)_. Required writing includes
several papers in forms appropriate to the designation of the course. Research
based writing is required in all sections. Students also have the opportunity
to work on one project that has been assigned in one of his or her classes in
the major.

**STUDENTS IN CAS, EDUCATION AND COMPUTER SCIENCE SHOULD TAKE THE SECTION THAT
IS MOST APPROPRIATE TO THEIR FIELDS. For example,**

**1. Humanities (H)**

Literature

Fine Arts (Art, dance, music or theater)

Philosophy

Religion

**2. Social Science (S)**

Economics

Geography

Government

History

Anthropology

Psychology

**3. Natural Science (N)**

Astronomy

Biology

Chemistry

Physics

FOR ENGINEERING 302 (N) IS COMPULSORY

Business (B)

**Engl 309 Introduction to Nonfiction Writing**

001 MW 9am-10:15am

Staff

002 T 4:30-7:10pm

Thaiss

_Not to be taken concurrently with Engl 489 and not be taken by students who
have already taken Engl 489_.

Advanced practice in analyzing and writing such nonfiction forms as the essay,
memo, article, and the technical and scientific reports, depending on the
interests of the individual student.

C = NWE

**Engl 325 Dimensions of Writing and Literature**

001 MWF 10:30-11:20am

Young

002 MW 3-4:15pm

Sypher

003 TR 12-1:15pm

Bergmann

004 W 7:20-10pm

Jann

301 W 5:55-7:10pm

Examines English as a discipline and develops interpretive skills that
students will need for further study in the major. All sections cover such
issues as form, genre, point of view, figurative language, conventions of
close reading and of literary interpretation, and the ways in which culture
shapes texts. In addition to regular class meetings, students are required to
attend weekly lectures, performances, or readings . Open to all students
Required of those majoring or minoring in English, who should take Engl 325
before taking other 300- or 400- level literature courses, and who must obtain
a minimum grade of C to satisfy degree requirements in the English major or
minor.

**Engl 332 Introduction to Film**

001 TR 12-1:15pm

002 TR 3-4:15pm

Screening T 7:20-10pm

Roan

Introduction to film medium as an art form.

C = FMS, CST

**Engl 333 Folklore of the Americas**

001 MW 1:30-2:45pm

Yocom

"Folklore was the art of the people before they knew there was such a thing as
art"--Zora Neale Hurston.

Long before there was written literature, there were songs to sing, stories to
tell, objects to make, and festivals to enjoy. Some have died off; some live
today in the oral tradition, though they wear different livery; and others
have newly appeared. In this course, we'll develop ways of understanding what
lies beneath the deceptively simple surface of traditional materials such as
contemporary legends, Native American myths,  family stories, songs, quilts,
woodcarvings, and festivals such as the late-October celebrations of
Halloween,  Days of the Dead, and Diwali. Using theoretical perspectives from
folklore study, literature, and anthropology, we'll consider why some
traditions have lasted into the present and what their changes signify. We'll
ask what functions traditional practices serve in their societies, how gender
influences both their content and their performance, and how people manipulate
and invent traditions for their own ends. Although material from cultures in
the Americas form most of our readings, students are encouraged to share their
world-wide  traditions in class. Books include Schoemaker, The Emergence of
Folklore in Everyday Life; Morgan,  Children of Strangers: The Stories of a
Black Family; Tangherlini, Talking Trauma: Paramedics' Storytelling;  Santino,
Halloween and Other Festivals of Death and Life; Anaya, Bless Me, Ultima.
Films include "La  Ofrenda" (Mexican Days of the Dead), "Stone Carvers"
(Washington DC National Cathedral carvings).

Optional fieldtrip. Assignments include exam questions through out the
semester, a short paper, and a semester project.

See http://mason.gmu.edu/~myocom.

C = FML, CST

**Engl 333 Folklore of the Americas**

002 TR 9-10:15am

003 W 4:30-7:10pm

Shutika

"Folklore was the art of the people before they knew there was such a thing as
art"--Zora Neale Hurston.

Long before there was written literature, there were songs to sing, stories to
tell, objects to make, and festivals to enjoy. Some have died off; some live
today in the oral tradition, though they wear different livery; and others
have newly appeared. In this course, we'll develop ways of understanding what
lies beneath the deceptively simple surface of traditional materials such as
contemporary legends, Native American myths, family stories, songs, quilts,
woodcarvings, and festivals such as the late-October celebrations of
Halloween,  Days of the Dead, and Diwali. Using theoretical perspectives from
folklore study, literature, and anthropology, we'll consider why some
traditions have lasted into the present and what their changes signify. We'll
ask what functions traditional practices serve in their societies, how gender
influences both their content and their performance, and how people manipulate
and invent traditions for their own ends. Although material from cultures in
the Americas form most of our readings, students are encouraged to share their
world-wide  traditions. Books include Schoemaker, _The Emergence of Folklore
in Everyday Life_ ;  Esquivel, _Like Water for Chocolate_ (a novel based upon
Mexican family  narrative); Durand, _Miracles on the Border: Retablos of
Mexican Migrants to_ _the United States_ (Mexican Folk Art); _Santino,
Halloween and Other Festivals_ _of Death and Life and Basso_ , _Portraits of
"the Whiteman": Linguistic Play and Cultural Symbols Among the Western Apache
(Native American Folklore and Humor)_. Assignments will include exam questions
throughout the semester, a short paper and semester project.

Optional fieldtrip planned. Students with questions about this course and its
content are welcome to contact the instructor directly at shutika@msn.com.

C = FML, CST

**Engl 335 Shakespeare "Comedies and Histories"**

001 MW 1:30-2:45am

Hodges

In this course, we will read a series of rhetorically inventive, politically
tangled, and long popular plays about love and war. This survey of
Shakespeare's comedies and histories, largely written in the 1590s, will allow
us to consider the sources and contexts of these two important genres as they
develop from play to play. We will also discuss performances of the plays,
both in the public theaters of Shakespeare's day and in contemporary films.
Students should expect quizzes, several short papers, one longer essay, and a
final exam.

C = DRA, MRL, POE, FML

**Engl 336 Shakespeare "Tragedies and Romances"**

002 TR 1:30-2:45pm

D'Andrea

Shakespeare is one of the most important cultural resources we possess; we
need the vision embodied in his work to help us as we create our own aesthetic
and ethical lives. The goal is to learn how to read and how to direct, in
one's own mind or on the stage, these perennially vital plays, to see how they
are built, and how and what they mean. The course deals with practical stage
craft, Elizabethan context, and relevance to contemporary art and moral
vision.

C = MRL, DRA, POE, FML

**Engl 337 Special Topics in Myth and Literature**

001 MWF 10:30-11:20am

Rutledge

In this course we will study the uses and functions of myth in English and
American literature, focusing on seminal mythical tales from classical,
biblical, and Celtic mythology; the course is not intended as a survey of
traditional myths. In addition, we will examine several critical strategies
for the study of myth, including archetypal and structuralist, considering the
strengths and weaknesses of the various approaches. We will study two or three
mythic patterns in poetry and in fiction: the odyssey/quest, stories using the
legends of Demeter and of Lilith, and perhaps the Grail legend. That women
tend to be classed among the nature goddesses rather than among the heroes
suggests a need to question how we classify stories. How far do myths support
the status quo? Are they potentially subversive? Myths are developed in
history and reworked in culture; myth does not easily "explain" either.
Critics include Frazier, Frye, L└vi-Strauss, and Campbell. In addition to a
selection of readings from traditional mythologies, texts may include _The
Odyssey_ (Homer as well as Derek Walcott's play based on the epic); _Alice in
Wonderland_ ; T. S. Eliot's _The Wasteland_ ; Tolkien's _The Hobbit_ ; George
MacDonald's _Lilith_ and _Dawn_ by Octavia Butler; Rita Dove's Demeter
sequence _Mother Love_ ; and at least one work based on Irish or Welsh
mythology.

Much close, careful reading; three longer 4-5 pp. papers; several focused,
short papers (2 pp.); and a final examination.

C = FML

**Engl 345 Literary Surveys "Early American"**

001 MW 9-10:15am

Williams

This course is not only a survey of the foundations of American literature
from its origins to the Civil War, it is also a survey of the beginnings of
our current theoretical debate between a social constructionist, essentialist,
and modernist views of reality. We have, as this course will demonstrate, been
post-modern before. To understand the extent to which the current theoretical
debates were already encoded in the earlier discourses, a reading acknowledged
by Jacques Derrida himself, is to understand in a new way the history and
power of these ideas and their connection to the origins of American culture
and American nationalism. Readings will include such canonical authors as
Winthrop, Bradford, Edwards, Franklin, Emerson, and Thoreau, as well as
alternative voices such as those of Mary Rowlandson, Nat Turner, and Mary
Moody Emerson. After surveying both the Calvinist beginnings, the Romantic
rebellion, and the beginnings of a rationalist Modernism, the course will
conclude with a careful reading of _Moby Dick_ with an eye to how Melville
encoded these conflicts in his most famous novel.

C = BAL

**Engl 345 Crime Literature High and Low**

002 TR 12-1:15pm

Thompson

See prerequisites

A course in crime literature from the 19th century, focusing on the
relationship between literary and  sub-literary forms. We will begin with
Dickens' novel Oliver Twist and accounts of crime from The Newgate  Calendar,
penny broadsides, and street ballads. While Oliver Twist is considered a
classic today, in the 1830s and 40s it was tainted, in the minds of some
critics at least, by its association with cheap criminal biographies and the
dissolute crowds who congregated at public executions. Crime literature
provoked anxiety because of the fear that it would corrupt the young and
spread violence throughout society. As a result, many middle-class writers
abandoned the subject until the rise of sensation fiction in the 1850s and
60s. Over the course of the semester, we will look at the potential challenges
such writing posed to ideas of respectability and the fear of contamination
which lay behind criticism of the form. In addition to _Oliver_ _Twist_ , we
will read Collins' _The Woman in White_ and Braddon's _Lady Audley's Secret_.
We will also consult  an electronic archive of Victorian popular literature.
Frequent class reports and collaborative projects, two papers, and a final
exam.

C = BAL, FIC

**Engl 363 The African-American Short Story**

001 MW 10:30-11:45am

Clark

This course will investigate the development of the African-American  short
story from the **** beginning of the twentieth century to the present. We will
study a diverse collection of writers and stories, including  Charles
Chesnutt, Zora Neale Hurston, Langston Hughes, Ann Petry, James  Alan
McPherson, Toni Cade Bambara, and Randall Kenan. We will also explore the
points of intersection and divergence between the African- American short
story and the American short story, as well as major technical and
narratological developments of the genre. Course requirements will include
reports, two essays, and two examinations.

C = FIC, CST

**Engl 368 Beginnings of African American Literature to 1865**

001 TR 1:30-2:45pm

Trafton

This course will provide an introduction to some of the most important issues,
themes, and texts associated with African American literature from the
earliest days of the slave trade to 1865. The selections we will cover will
include poetry, drama, song and other folk traditions, political manifestos,
and correspondence, as well as the most recognizable forms in this tradition,
the novel and the autobiography. Readings will include Olaudah Equiano,
Phillis Wheatley, Frederick Douglass, Harriet Jacobs, William Wells Brown, and
more. Conceptually, we will play close attention to issues of diversity within
this canon. In addition to the stylistic diversity included in the syllabus,
we will emphasize other forms of variety and heterogeneity among and between
our chosen texts; gender will be a focus, but so will, age, political
orientation, religious beliefs, and geography. Our task will be to articulate
the wide range of differences represented by our texts and their authors,
while simultaneously understanding how they can be said to form a cohesive
tradition. Assignments for this course will include four major assignments,
plus a choice between either a large final paper or a final exam.

C = BAL, CST

**Engl 371 African American Literature of the 20 th Century to 1946**

001 MW 9-10:15am

McKenzie

This course will examine the essential themes, aesthetic concerns and textual
strategies of African American writers of the twentieth century, but we will
begin with a consideration of the slave narrative as the genre which gave
birth to the African American literary tradition at the same time that we
explore the African roots of tradition. We will examine those influences--
especially historical, political, and cultural--that have shaped the poetry,
fiction, and prose Nonfiction of such writers as W.E.B. DuBois, James Baldwin,
Alain Locke, Langston Hughes, Jean Toomer, Richard Wright, Ralph Ellison,
Nella Larsen, Zora Neale Hurston, Gwendolyn Brooks, Toni Morrison, Amiri
Baraka, Gloria Naylor and Maya Angelou among others. Students will engage in
close readings of texts to examine relationships among the works of these
writers. In addition, attention will be given to recent critical approaches to
black literature and culture to discern how they challenge and enrich the
established tradition in American Literature and how they treat such cultural
issues as identity and representation.

C = TCL, CST

**Engl 380 Recent American Fiction**

001 TR 3-4:15pm

Nadeau

Students in this course will have an opportunity to study the development of
the American novel from roughly 1930 to the present within a social and
historical context. Much emphasis will be placed on the enormous diversity of
this fiction and upon the influence on one generation of writers of major
figures in the previous generation. The format of the course will be lecture-
discussion. All students will be expected to study assigned materials
carefully prior to class.

C = TCL, FIC

**Engl 396 Introduction to Creative Writing**

001 MWF 2:30-3:20pm

Staff

002 TR 3-4:15pm

Staff

003 M 7:20-10pm

Staff

004 F 10:30-1:15pm

Staff

Introduction to the theory and practice of creative writing. Assignments will
include writing exercises and original works of poetry and fiction. May also
include drama and/or creative nonfiction. Includes reading assignments in
covered genres, and may include oral presentations or in-class performance.
Original student work is read and discussed in class and in conference with
the instructor.

C = NWE

**Engl 397 Poetry Writing**

001 M 4:30-7:20pm

Staff

_Prerequisite_ : _Engl 396 or permission of instructor_

Workshop course in reading and writing poetry. Original student work is read
and discussed in class and in conferences with the instructor. Includes
technical exercises in the craft of poetry and may include reading
assignments.

C = CW, POE

**Engl 398 Fiction Writing**

001 MW 10:30-11:45am

Scott

002 R 4:30-7:10pm

Miller

_Prerequisite: Engl 396 or permission of instructor_

Workshop course in reading and writing fiction. Original student work is read
and discussed in class and in conferences with the instructor. Includes
technical assignments in the craft of fiction and may include reading
assignments.

C = CW, FIC

**Engl 399 Creative Nonfiction Writing**

001 TR 10:30-11:45am

Goodwin

_Prerequisite: Engl 309 or Engl 396, or permission of instructor_

C = NEW, CW

[Back to top](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english/fall01courses.html#top)

**Engl 400 Literature of the Middle Ages**

001 MWF 9:30-10:20am

Keaney

Selected English narrative, dramatic and homiletic literature written between
1300 and 1500, exclusive of Chaucer.

C = MRL, POE

**Engl 404 The Augustan Age**

001 MW 3-4:15pm

Yadav

English literature from the late 17th century to the middle of the 18th
century. Writers covered may include Dryden, Rochester, Behn, Defoe, Swift,
Pope and Montagu.

**C = BAL**

**Engl 407 Prose and Poetry of the Victorian Age**

001 M 7:20-10pm

Story

By the end of 2001 all Victorian material culture will have become a hundred
or more years old and will qualify commercially as "antique." Perhaps this
lengthening perspective helps explain why the Victorians are of continuing
great interest in historical fiction and film. (For some historical
atmosphere, see any recent film or PBS production set during the long reign of
Queen Victoria, 1837-1901.) In that period Great Britain assumed world
leadership in industrial production and overseas empire. English literature
likewise assumed international prominence. This course takes a historical and
cultural approach to poetry by Alfred, Lord Tennyson, Robert and Elizabeth
Barrett Browning, and Matthew Arnold; and prose by Thomas Carlyle, John
Ruskin, J. S. Mill, and Oscar Wilde, among others. It also considers some
estimable "minor" Victorians such as the Pre-Raphaelite poets and painters. We
will use slides and the Internet to view some Victorian paintings. European
imperial rivalries of the period climaxed in the "Great War" of 1914-1918, so
we will briefly conclude with that period. In format the course combines brief
lecture presentations with lots of discussion of texts and contexts.
Requirements: essay-style midterm and final exams; three short analytical
papers.

C = BAL, POE

**Engl 410 Technical and Report Writing**

001 R 4:30-7:10pm

Leith **(meets at Prince William campus)**

002 TR 3-4:15pm

Baxter

003 TR 5:55-7:10pm

Baxter

_Prerequisites: Six credits of composition, including Engl 302 and six credits
in humanities or permission of the instructor_.

Intensive study and practice in various forms of technical writing, including
formal and informal reports, proposals, and technical correspondence. Emphasis
on writing for a variety of audiences, both lay and informed, and on writing
within various professional and organizational contexts.

C = NWE

**Engl 414** **Honors Seminar "The Novel In the World: Africa and South
Asia"**

001 MW 5:55-7:10pm

Yadav

The novel has been the dominant literary form since the nineteenth century not
only in Europe but also in many other parts of the world, and in recent
decades some of the most interesting and challenging writing in this genre has
come from the extra-European world. In this course we will examine the
development of the novel in two such regions of the world, Africa and South
Asia. Our close examination of a selection of late twentieth-century novels
from these two areas will serve as the basis for a series of questions about
the concerns and social function of novels in areas outside the European and
North American worlds. While we may be familiar with some of the central
concerns and forms of the novel in the west, what concerns are important in
African and South Asian novels? What kinds of novelistic forms or subgenres do
these works exemplify? What kind of social function do these novels fulfill in
their respective societies and for their various audiences? We will begin by
reading a few critical selections on the English novel to detail some of the
forms and concerns of this tradition and of the critical tradition that has
developed around it. This will serve as a stepping stone to thinking about the
(similar or dissimilar) forms and concerns of the novels we will be reading
from the extra-European world. We will move onto a series of novels from
Africa (from Nigeria and Kenya, in particular), followed by novels from South
Asia, in an effort to see how these novels work and what concerns they handle.
The writers we will be reading will include Chinua Achebe, Ngugi wa Thiong'o,
Arundhati Roy, Salman Rushdie, and Wole Soyinka. With each novel, we will try
to understand its particular form, structure, and thematic engagements as well
as the larger social and cultural context that it speaks out of and addresses.
To help us think about such contexts more effectively, we will read some
critical writings by several of these authors (and a few other critics) as
well, and you will also undertake some independent research in relation to
your final papers. Our aim will be to become better acquainted with novelistic
practice in these parts of the world and through this to understand better
some of the sociocultural conflicts, differences, and commonalities that mark
our modern world.The course will be run as a seminar, so you will all be
expected to participate actively in discussion. You will, of course, be
responsible for the assigned reading each week; in addition, I will give you
some short assignments (e.g., having you write brief response papers to the
reading or lead class discussion on occasion). Finally, you will have a
research paper (10-12 pages) due at the end of the semester, though I will ask
you to produce steps towards the final product over the course of the
semester.

C = FIC, CST

**Engl 414 Honors Seminar "Utopia"**

002 TR 10:30-11:45am

Radner

AA map of the world that does not include Utopia is not worth even glancing
at, for it leaves out the one country at which Humanity is always landing.@
--Oscar Wilde, AThe Soul of Man Under Socialism@ (1891)

We Must redefine utopia. It isn't the perfect end-product of our wishes,
define it so and it deserves the scorn of those who sneer when they hear the
word. No. Utopia is the process of making a better world, the name for one
path history can t

