# **European Civilization to 1815**

### **History 25 - Mr. Steffens**

 History 25 is an introduction to the history of Europe from the waning of the
Middle Ages to the Napoleonic period. This course will stress those human
achievements and failures that characterized European civilization during
those centuries. Topics in the history of European philosophy, religion, art
and science will be considered, in addition to the political and social
history of Europe.

**REQUIRED READINGS:**

Jackson J. Spielvogel, **_Western Civilization, 1300-1815_** (Volume B)

Marilyn J. Boxer and Jean H. Quataert, **_Connecting Spheres: Women in the
Western World, 1500 to the Present_**

Roland Bainton, **_Here I Stand_**

Garrett Mattingly, **_The Armada_**

Voltaire, **_Candide_**

**RECOMMENDED READING:**

H.J. Steffens and M.J. Dickerson, **_Writer's Guide: History_**  

If you are unfamiliar with writing in the discipline of history, this work
will give you an overview of appropriate concepts and written forms. Chapters
1,3,4,8 and 9 are especially important for this course.

[**Our local UVM homepage is**](http://www.uvm.edu/~hsteffen/index.html)
**www.uvm.edu/~hsteffen/ You will find this syllabus, and the questions for
the essay examinations on this page.**



### **CLASS TOPICS AND READING ASSIGNMENTS**

The reading assignments should be completed before the lectures for which they
are assigned. The readings vary in length, so please plan ahead. You should
complete the weekly reading assignment by the beginning of each week. Expect
to read and study for about 2 hours at home for each hour in class. You will
need to do some careful planning of your study time to derive the most
personal benefit from this course.

**Aug. 26 Introduction**

**Aug. 28, 30, Sept. 4 MEDIEVAL BACKGROUNDS**

> **_Text,_** Chapter 11, complete  
>  **_Connecting Spheres,_** Foreword, Introduction, and Part I Overview
(complete to p. 60)  
>  **_Writer's Guide: History,_** Chaps. 1, 3, 4, 8, and 9.

**(Sept. 2 Labor Day)**

  **Sept. 6, 9, 11, 13 RENAISSANCE**

> **_Text,_** Chapter 12. complete

  ** _Sept. 16, 18 and 20 REFORMATION_**

> **_Text,_** Chapter 13, complete  
>  **_Here I Stand,_** complete

  **Sept. 23, 25, and 27 COUNTER-REFORMATION**

> **_Text,_** Chapter 13, "The Catholic Reformation" (pp. 386-392)

  **Sept. 30 FIRST ESSAY EXAMINATION [Monday]**

  **Oct. 2, 4, 7, and 9 SIXTEENTH and SEVENTEENTH CENTURY EUROPE**

> **_Text,_** Chapter 14, complete  
>  **_Connecting Spheres,_** Part 1, Chaps. 2 and 3  
>  **_The Armada,_** begin reading

  **Oct. 11, 14, and 16 ENGLISH REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT**

> **_Text,_** Chapter 15, "Limited Monarchy and Republics", pages 444 to 459.  
>  **_The Armada,_** complete

  **(Oct. 18 Fall Recess)**

**Oct. 21, 23, and 25 ABSOLUTISM ON THE CONTINENT**

> **_Text,_** Chapter 15, complete  
>  **_Connecting Spheres,_** Part I, Chaps. 1 and 4

  **Oct. 28, 30 and Nov. 1 THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION**

> **_Text,_** Chapter 16, complete  
>  **_Connecting Spheres,_** Part I, Chap. 5

  **Nov. 4, 6, 8, and 11 THE AGE OF REASON and THE ENLIGHTENMENT**

> **_Text,_** Chapter 17, complete  
>  **_Connecting Spheres,_** Part II, Overview, p. 113 -130  
>  **_Candide,_** complete

**Nov. 13 SECOND ESSAY EXAMINATION [WEDNESDAY]**

  **Nov. 15, and 18 EIGHTEENTH CENTURY EUROPE**

> **_Text,_** Chapter 18, complete

  **Nov. 20, 22 and 25 THE ANCIEN REGIME AND THE REVOLUTION**

> **_Text,_** Chapter 19, complete

  **Nov. 27-29 Thanksgiving Recess**

**Dec. 3, and 5 THE FRENCH REVOLUTION AND NAPOLEON**

  **Dec. 10 FINAL EXAMINATION, Tuesday, 8:00am, same classroom**



## COURSE FORMALITIES

**1\. OFFICE HOURS AND APPOINTMENTS**  

**I would be very pleased to help you learn history, and to discuss history
with you.**

My official office hours are: Monday, Friday, 8:00 to 9:00 am, Wednesday,
10:00 to 11:00 am.

**Please see me personally, either before or after class, to confirm an
appointment for a meeting.** If these hours are impossible for you, please
talk to me, in person, so that we can arrange another mutually convenient time
for us to meet. **My office is in the History Department, Wheeler House, Rm.
212. My office phone, and phone mail number is 64421.** Please communicate
with me directly, either in person before or after class, or during office
hours, or by phone conversation. To notify me of an emergency, my e-mail
address is [hsteffen@zoo.uvm.edu](mailto:hsteffen@zoo.uvm.edu)

My UVM website is [www.uvm.edu/~hsteffen/](http://www.uvm.edu/~hsteffen/)

**2\. CLASS ATTENDANCE POLICY**  

Class attendance is required. If you must be absent from class for reasons of
illness, or family emergency, you must notify me or your Dean of Student's
office **BEFORE** the class or classes that you cannot attend. It is your
responsibility to make-up whatever you missed just as soon as you are able to
return to classes. Perfect attendance is expected. WITH SEVEN VOLUNTARY,
UNEXCUSED ABSENCES, YOU FAIL THIS COURSE, REGARDLESS OF WHAT YOUR POINT
AVERAGE IS IN ALL OTHER PORTIONS OF THE COURSE. You cannot be absent for more
than two weeks and claim to have completed this course for credit.

**3\. COURSE GRADES**  

Course grades will be awarded as follows:

1\. Two In-Class Essay Examinations, 25 points each = 50 points

2\. Final Examination - 40 points (Two Essays each worth 25 points = 50
points)

3\. Attendance, as explained in the Class Attendance Policy above.

All students must write EVERY ESSAY: (1) the two essay examinations, and (2)
the two final examination essays. Failure to write ANY essay will result in
failure for the course, regardless of the numerical average for the other
components. The essay examinations are not optional. You must write every
essay. If this is not clear, please ask me any questions that you may have.

Final semester letter grades will be awarded as a result of a straight
numerical summation of all points earned during the semester, for each
component of the course. Final semester letter grades will be determined as
follows: 0-59=F; 60-69=D; 70-79=C; 80-89=B; 90-100=A. Plus and minus will be
added to these letters.

[NOTE - If it is necessary for you to miss an in-class examination, for
reasons of health or family emergency, you must notify me, or your Dean of
Student's office, **BEFORE** the time and date of the examination. After you
have returned to classes, You must arrange to take that examination as soon as
possible after the scheduled date of the exam. The final exam. date is
scheduled by the University. You must write this final examination at the
scheduled time and date. Failure to write ANY ESSAY will result in a failing
grade for the whole course. You may not choose to avoid writing an essay.  ]

After reading the descriptions of the course requirements, and listening to
the descriptions of these requirements in class, it is your responsibility to
understand what is required for this course. I am willing to answer any
questions that you might have about the course requirements. **Regular class
attendance, taking careful reading and lecture notes, and reading, writing and
learning history, are your responsibilities.** I will help you to learn and
understand history this semester.

  

### **STUDENT WRITING REQUIREMENTS**

**1\. TWO IN-CLASS ESSAYS**

[These essays will be written on September 1, and November 13, as noted
above.]

There will be 2 essay examinations given in class during the course of the
semester. These examinations will last for 50 minutes. You will receive a
numerical grade for each essay. The essays are worth 25 points each, for a
total of 50% of your final course grade. **[ If it is necessary for you to
miss an examination, for reasons of health or family emergency, you must
arrange to take the examination as soon as possible after you return to
classes. Regardless of the reason for not writing an examination, you must
arrange to write your essay as soon as possible after the scheduled date of
the examination.]**

Topics for these essays will be chosen directly from the required reading
assignments, and from the class lectures, to that date. It is crucial that you
read the required readings carefully, and that you stay current with the
reading assignments. You will need to take careful reading and lecture notes
throughout the semester. In your essay, you will be expected to: (1) provide a
full summary of the information available to you on the topic; and (2) display
an understanding of this information by making appropriate connections between
the topic and the historical context of the times. Your essays will be
evaluated on the basis of **BOTH** information content, and evidence that you
have understood the topic by relating it to the broader historical narrative.
**You are expected to display both knowledge and understanding in these
essays.**

You will be provided with study questions before each examination. You should
prepare your draft essay answer to each of the study questions at home, well
in advance of the exam. It is especially important for you to use information
from our required readings, as well as from your class notes, in the
preparation of your essays. One of these questions will be selected, at
random, for you to write during the examination period. You should prepare
your essays carefully, so that you will be able to complete them during the 50
minute examination period. If you can not write for the full 50 minute
examination period, it is clear that you have not found enough information, or
given enough thought to your essay.

[NOTE - For helpful suggestions on preparing your essays at home, and for
writing your essay in class, see **_Writer's Guide: History_**. ]

**2\. FINAL EXAMINATION - Tuesday, Dec. 10, 8:00 am**

There will be two essay questions on topics encompassing the full semester's
work on your final examination. You will have **THREE** hours to write your
TWO essays. These essays should incorporate the historical knowledge and
understanding that you acquired in preparing for your in-class essays. You
will be expected to synthesize information, and to analyze and evaluate
historical questions related to the course, in your final examination essays.
**This is your opportunity to show what you have learned during the course of
the semester.** **You should plan to write for a minimum of one hour for each
essay.  **

You will be provided with study questions before your final examination. These
questions will require a broader conceptual understanding of European history
than the relatively direct and specific essays that you have prepared for and
written during the semester. You should review your reading and lecture notes
carefully in preparation for these essays. Your previous preparations and
drafts for each of the essay examination questions during the semester will be
very important to you as you prepare for the final examination. You should
review all of your reading and lecture notes, as well as the drafts that you
prepared for each of the study questions for the two in-class exams. Two of
the study questions for the final examination will be chosen, at random, for
you to write for your final examination. **You should prepare your essays
carefully, and plan to write for a minimum of one hour for each essay. If you
cannot write for at least one full hour for each of your final examination
essays, it is clear that your have not found enough information, or given
enough thought to your essays.**

The final examination date and time are chosen by the University. You must
write the final examination at this scheduled time and date.

[NOTE - For helpful suggestions on preparing your essays at home, and for
writing your essays in class, see **_Writer's Guide: History_**. ]



