![](images/hr1.gif)  
---  
[![LII](images/lii.gif)](http://www.law.cornell.edu/) |  **SUPREME COURT
COLLECTION** | [![Supreme Court Collection
home](images/sc2.gif)](../index.html)  
![](images/hr1.gif)  
  
 [![Supreme Court collection
home](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/images/colln1.gif)](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct)

|

**Search  **   \--all current and historic decisions Current decisions only
Current syllabi only Historic decisions only  
  
---|---  
  Rutledge v. United States. (94-8769), 517 U.S. 292 (1996).  
  
---  
**Opinion**  
[ Stevens ]|  **Syllabus**  
  
[HTML version](/supct/html/94-8769.ZO.html)  
[WordPerfect version](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/word-
perfect/94-8769.ZO)| [HTML version](/supct/html/94-8769.ZS.html)  
[WordPerfect version](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/word-
perfect/94-8769.ZS)  


NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader. See
_United States_ v. _Detroit Lumber Co.,_ [200 U.S.
321](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/sup-choice.cgi?200+321), 337.



**SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES**

Syllabus



RUTLEDGE _v.  _UNITED STATES

 certiorari to the united states court of appeals for the seventh circuit

 No. 94-8769. Argued November 27, 1995 \-- Decided March 27, 1996

A jury found petitioner guilty of one count of participating in a conspiracy
to distribute controlled substances in violation of [21 U.S.C. ¡ì
846](http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/21/846.html) and one count of
conducting a continuing criminal enterprise (CCE) "in concert" with others in
violation of ¡ì848\. The "in concert" element of his CCE offense was based on
the same agreement as the ¡ì846 conspiracy. The District Court entered judgment
of conviction on both counts and imposed a sentence of life imprisonment
without possible release on each, the sentences to be served concurrently.
Pursuant to [18 U.S.C. ¡ì 3013](http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/18/3013.html)
it also ordered petitioner to pay a special assessment of $50 on each count.
The Seventh Circuit affirmed, relying on _Jeffers_ v. _United States,_ [432
U.S. 137](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/sup-choice.cgi?432+137), to
reject petitioner's contention that his convictions and concurrent life
sentences impermissibly punished him twice for the same offense.

_Held:_ The District Court erred in sentencing petitioner to concurrent life
sentences on the  ¡ì846 and ¡ì848 counts. Pp. 4-15.

 (a) It is presumed that a legislature does not intend to impose two
punishments where two statutory provisions proscribe the "same offense." The
test for determining whether there are two offenses is whether each of the
statutory provisions requires proof of a fact which the other does not.
_Blockburger_ v. _United States,_ [284 U.S.
299](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/sup-choice.cgi?284+299), 304. This
Court has often concluded that two statutes define the "same offense" where
one is a lesser included offense of the other. For the reasons set forth in
_Jeffers,_ 432 U. S., at 149-150 (plurality opinion); _id.,_ at 158, and 159,
n. 5 (dissenting opinion), and particularly because the plain meaning of
¡ì848's "in concert" phrase signifies mutual agreement in a common plan or
enterprise, the Court now resolves definitively that a guilty verdict on a
¡ì848 charge necessarily includes a finding that the defendant also
participated in a conspiracy violative of ¡ì846\. Conspiracy is therefore a
lesser included offense of CCE. Pp. 4-8.

 (b) The Court rejects the Government's contention that the presumption
against multiple punishments does not invalidate either of petitioner's
convictions because the sentence on the second one was concurrent. That
conviction amounts to a second punishment because a $50 special assessment was
imposed on it. Cf. _Ray_ v. _United States,_ [481 U.S.
736](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/sup-choice.cgi?481+736) (1987) _(per
curiam)_. Even if the assessment were ignored, the force of the Government's
argument would be limited by _Ball_ v. _United States,_ [470 U.S.
856](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/sup-choice.cgi?470+856), 861-865, in
which the Court concluded that Congress did not intend to allow punishment for
both illegally "receiving" and illegally "possessing" a firearm; held that the
only remedy consistent with the congressional intent was to vacate one of the
underlying convictions as well as the concurrent sentence based upon it; and
explained that the second conviction does not evaporate simply because of its
sentence's concurrence, since it has potential adverse collateral
consequences-- _e.g.,_ delay of parole eligibility or an increased sentence
under a recidivist statute for a future offense--that make it presumptively
impermissible to impose. Although petitioner did not challenge the $50
assessment below, the fact that  ¡ì3013 required its imposition renders it as
much a collateral consequence of the conspiracy conviction as the consequences
recognized by _Ball._ Pp. 8-10.

 (c) Also rejected is the Government's argument that the presumption against
multiple punishments is overcome here because Congress has clearly indicated
its intent to allow courts to impose them. Support for that view cannot be
inferred from the fact that this Court's _Jeffers_ judgment allowed
convictions under both  ¡ì¡ì846 and 848 to stand, since those convictions were
entered in separate trials, the Court's review addressed only the ¡ì848
conviction, and that conviction was affirmed because the four Justice
plurality decided that Jeffers had waived any right to object, see 432 U. S.,
at 152-154, and because Justice White took the herein before rejected position
that conspiracy was not a lesser included offense of CCE, see _id.,_ at 158
(opinion concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part). As to this
issue, then, the judgment is not entitled to precedential weight because it
amounts at best to an unexplained affirmance by an equally divided court. Pp.
10-12.

 (d) The Government's argument that Congress intended to allow multiple
convictions here to provide a "back up" conviction, preventing a defendant who
later successfully challenges his greater offense from escaping punishment
altogether, is unpersuasive. There is no reason why this particular pair of
greater and lesser offenses should present any novel problem not already
addressed by the federal appellate courts, which have uniformly concluded--
with this Court's approval, see, _e.g., Morris_ v. _Mathews,_ [475 U.S.
237](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/sup-choice.cgi?475+237), 246-247--
that they may direct the entry of judgment for a lesser included offense when
a conviction for a greater offense is reversed on grounds affecting only the
greater offense. Pp. 12-14.

 (e) Because the Court here adheres to the presumption that Congress intended
to authorize only one punishment, one of petitioner's convictions, as well as
its concurrent sentence, is unauthorized punishment for a separate offense and
must be vacated under _Ball,_ 470 U. S., at 864. P. 15.

 40 F. 3d 879, reversed and remanded.

 Stevens, J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court.





[![Copyright](/supct/images/copyright.gif)](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/credits.html)
|

 [![About us](/supct/images/aboutus.gif)](http://www.law.cornell.edu/lii.html)
|

 [![Send email](/supct/images/email.gif)](http://www.law.cornell.edu/help/)  
---|---|---

