S113 Western Civilization to 1500  
Fall 2000  
Mr. Blumenshine  
Tuesday, Thursday  
9 a.m. (KT149)

Office Hours: TR 10:30-12 noon  
Office: CM 201 (481-5400, Ext. 6696)  
History Office: 481-6686

Required Texts

McKay, Hill and Buckler, _A History of Western Society_ , vol.1  
Rand McNally, _Historical Atlas of the World_  
Apuleius, _The Golden Ass_ , translated by Jack Lindsay

**

Bring the text to class each day.

**

[S113 Short Historical
Biography](http://www.ipfw.edu/hist/SYLLABI/s113biog.htm)

[Study Guide No. 1](http://www.ipfw.edu/hist/SYLLABI/H113STU1a.HTM)

[Study Guide No. 2](http://www.ipfw.edu/hist/SYLLABI/H113stu2a.html)

[Assignment No. 1](http://www.ipfw.edu/hist/syllabi/008/S113study1.HTM)

[Assignment No. 2](http://www.ipfw.edu/hist/syllabi/008/S113study2.htm)

[Assignment No. 3](http://www.ipfw.edu/hist/syllabi/008/S113study3.htm)

[Book Analysis](http://www.ipfw.edu/hist/syllabi/s113apuleius.htm)

Description and Goals

If you complete History S113 successfully, you should have become aware of the
early background of Modern Western Civilization through reading, discussion,
analysis, and film; you should have learned something about (1) the
geographical setting and (2) the historical development of western political
and governmental organization from the city-states of antiquity to the
absolutist and constitutional nation-states of early modern times; about (3)
the role of religion in early western societies and (4) the place of education
and ideas in the formation of cultural values and in the transmission of those
values to later ages; about (5) the social role of women, workers, priests,
nobles, and urban dwellers in ancient and medieval history; about how (6) the
higher arts reflect the setting and values of the society in which they were
created and thus become an immediate and vital contact with earlier societies
separated from the modern age by time. Finally, a student who successfully
completes this course should comprehend (7) how the study of history can help
to understand the world more fully, to acknowledge its debt to past
developments, to visualize its potential, to understand and accept human
diversity.

As the core curriculum is presently construed, this class, S113, Western
Civilization to 1500, fulfills partially the requirements in Area III: The
Individual, Culture and Society.

**

Grading and Attendance Policy**

Your grade will be determined as follows _:_

Two Exams (20% Each)  
Book analysis of Apuleius  
Historical Biography  
All Purpose Grade* |

40%  
20%  
20%  
20%  
    


  
---|---  
  
*All Purpose Grade will include class attendance, participation in discussion of documents and class projects, involvement and commitment to material and classwork, responsive and thoughtful reactions. The All Purpose Grade is not likely to change the formal assessment very much, but it could be a factor in a close grade. Remember that plus and minus grading is now in effect at IPFW.

Attendance is required in this class. The roll will be taken every day and
attendance will be taken on the days of the two exams (17 October and 30
November). Only by an arrangement made at least one week before the exam may a
student be excused from the exam; the reason must be legitimate--that is, for
medical or work-related matters.

Past experience suggests students perform better on exams and become engaged
in studying history more fully if they attend class regularly. Students who
earned superior grades in the past semester have normally attended class on a
regular basis, while those who found the class both challenging and
enlightening, have also found the class work and the close discussion of
textbook and images with the teacher to be useful and informative. Students,
who attempted to do the course on their own, and frequently skipped class,
have normally not lived up to their own expectations on tests and grades. For
most students, regular class attendance is probably a useful policy.

**

Make -up Test Policy**

If a student does miss an exam for whatever reason, it is always possible to
make up the missed exam within six days of the exam date. It is the student's
responsibility to arrange with the instructor for the make-up exam. The
penalty is one full letter grade for missing the exam without excuse.

**

Book Analysis of Apuleius** **and The Historical Biography.**

One requirement in this class is writing a book review on Apuleius' _The
Golden Ass_. Specific instructions about the assignment will then be given on
the web along with instructions about the other independent assignment, the
Historical Biography. Both papers are short assignments, 3 to 5 pages in
length. The dates due are already printed on the syllabus.

**

The Exams**

Each exam will contain 25 multiple-choice questions, 5 one-paragraph
identifications of which 2 must be answered, and 3 essays, of which 1 must be
answered. The study guide for each exam will offer all multiple-choice
questions in interrogative form, a list of identification terms on the exam,
and the essays which will appear on the exam.

**

Both tests must be completed to pass this course.**

No recording devices are permitted in the classroom without special
permission.

**

Assignments, text-analysis, discussions, and tests should be approximately as
follows:**  
    
    


22-29 August  
The Legacy of Greece |  _

History_ , 63-103  
---|---  
  
31 August-5 September  
Hellenistic Diffusion  |  _

History_ , 105-133  
  
7-12 September  
The Rise of Rome |  _

History_ , 135-161  
  
14-21 September  
The Pax Romana |  _

History_ , 163-197  
  
26-28 September  
The Making of Europe |  _

History,_ 199-241  
  
3-12 October  
The Carolingian World |  _

History_ , 243-271 **Apuleius Paper due 3 Oct.**  
  
17 October |

Exam I  
  
19-24 October  
Revival, Recovery, Reform and Expansion |  _

History,_ 273-299  
  
26-31 October  
Life in Christian Europe |  _

History_ , 301-333  
  
2-9 November  
Creativity and Vitality of the High Middle Ages |  _

History_ , 335-375  
  
14-16 November  
Later Middle Ages |  _

History,_ 379-413 **Historical Biography due 16 November**  
  
21-28 November  
Renaissance |  _

History_ , 415-449  
  
30 November |

Exam II  
  
Tuesday 12 December  |

Final Meeting -9 a.m. - **KT 149**  
  
Return to History Department Homepage

  
    
    


**Return to: ** |

IPFW Home Page  
---|---  
  
  |

Previous Page  
  
  |

Go to Helmke Library Homepage

