> > ##  When Worlds Collide: Homosexuality and Public Policy

>>

>> ### **PAC 405-SU99**

>>

>>  
>>

>>  
>>

>> **Instructor:**

>>

>> |

>>

>>  
>>

>> Allan F. Cook, Ed. D.  
>>  
>> ---|---  
>>  
>>  
>>

>> **Office:**

>>

>> |

>>

>>  
>>

>> Brookens 385  
>>  
>>  
>>

>> **Contacts:**

>>

>> |

>>

>>  
>>

>> Office - 206-7007  
>>  
>>  
>>

>> |

>>

>> Email - cook@uis.edu  
>>  
>>  
>>

>> |

>>

>> Internet - http://www.uis.edu/~cook/  
>>  
>> **RESOURCES**

>>

>> **Texts:**

>>

>> |

>>

>>  
>>

>> |

>>

>> Osborn, T. (1996). _Coming Home to America_. New York, NY: St.  
>  Martins Press  
>>  
>> ---|---|---  
>>  
>>  
>>

>> |

>>

>>  
>>

>> |

>>

>> Swan, W.K. (1997). _Gay/Lesbian/Bisexual/Transgender Public  
>  Policy Issues_. New York, NY: Harrington Press.  
>>  
>> **Additional Sources** :

>>

>> |

>>

>>  
>>

>> |

>>

>> Books and Articles on reserve in Brookens Library  
>>  
>> **Class Page:**

>>

>> |

>>

>>  
>>

>> |

>>

>> [http://www.uis.edu/~cook/pac](http://www.uis.edu/~cook/pac)

>>

>> *  The class page contains an on-line/hypersyllabus, a list of supplemental
readings and Internet sites related to the topics discussed in this class, and
a message board. This site supplements the syllabus, and should be consulted
weekly, if not more frequently.  
>>  
>> **Course Description:**

>>

>>> This course, a look at public policy and homosexuality, will be conducted
as a seminar, in which students are responsible for reading assigned and
supplemental readings for each class period and will come to class prepared to
discuss that week's topic. A variety of resources will be provided, including,
but not limited to an assigned textbook, reserve books and articles, and a
page on the Internet with links to timely articles, groups, and Internet
sites.

>>>

>>> There is only one prerequisite for this course, an open mind. The course
is open to all, regardless of age, gender identity, race, handicap, or sexual
identity. Guest speakers will be invited to address the class on policy
issues, and media and technology will be used to supplement instruction.
Students will write reactions to assigned readings or supplemental materials
and research a topic of interest related to current issues involving
homosexuality and public policy, making use of both the library and the
Internet resources. Students will be expected to prepare either a "major"
paper regarding the issue they have chosen.

>>

>> **Course Goals:**

>>

>>   * Students will utilize appropriate library and Internet resources to
explore issues related to homosexuality and public policy.

>>   * Students will demonstrate an awareness and understanding of issues
related to homosexuality and public policy. Students will demonstrate the
ability to look at both sides of an issue in a calm and rational manner.
Students will use Internet technology to submit assignments and/or explore
issues related to homosexuality and public policy. Students will be able to
thoughtfully and articulately discuss and write about issues and/or problems
related to homosexuality and public policy.

>>

>>

>> **Attendance:**

>>

>>> As adults you are responsible for attending class, taking notes, and
obtaining any handouts which have been distributed in class. If you are
absent, you must make your own arrangements for someone to share their notes
and collect any handouts which are distributed in class during your absence.
While may of the supplemental materials will be available for review during
the semester, the fact that this is a seminar-style course makes _regular
attendance_ an important issue. Students who are chronically absent will be
unable to participate in the dialog that will be so important for this class,
and as a result, may not receive as good a grade as they would hope to

>>

>> **Minimum Expectations:**

>>

>>   * You are expected to come to class prepared to participate in all
classroom discussions and activities.

>>   * You are expected to write five 2-3 page reaction papers. See details
below under Assignment One.

>>   * You are expected to prepare a "major" paper dealing with an issue
related to public policy and homosexuality as your "Final". See details below
under Assignment Two.

>>   * You are expected to turn in all assignments when they are due.

>>

>> * _The paper or presentation will represent 35% of your grade. The reaction
papers will represent 50% of your grade. Attendance and participation will
represent the final 15%._

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Assignment One:** Reaction papers should be two to three pages long,
typed or word processed and on a subject related to homosexuality and public
policy. The reaction may be to an assigned reading, the supplemental
materials, a video shown in class, or appropriate current event material from
newspapers, magazines or journals. Five are required, so you will not have to
turn in one each class session, but you should "pace" yourself so that you are
turning in _only one_ reaction paper at a time. _These assignments may be
submitted by Email to the instructor._

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Assignment Two** : Your "Final" will be a major paper dealing with an
issue related to public policy and homosexuality. Our topics of discussion may
be used, or you may choose to come up with your own topic in selecting your
topic.

>>

>> Papers should be written in APA format (or another format if you are
unfamiliar with APA,,,check with the instructor), typed or word processed.
While the required and supplemental readings may be used as part of your
references, please limit their use to only about 25% of your references. You
are encouraged to research your topic in depth in the library or on the
Internet in preparing to write this paper.

>>

>> How long should the paper be? At least longer than a reaction paper, but
not longer than you need to give an accurate reporting of your research.

>>

>> Papers are due the last session of class. If you want your paper returned,
please provide a SSA Envelope

>>

>> ** **

>>

>> ##

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> **Topics/Reading List**

>>

>>>  
>>>

>>> You will notice, as you peruse this list of topics and readings that not
every class session has a "required reading". On those class days, you should
choose at least one of the supplemental readings (on reserve in Brookens
Library), and/or visit one of the suggested Internet sites, **take notes** ,
and use this information in lieu of the "required reading". Come to class
prepared to discuss what you read or viewed, just as you would at those
sessions where there was a required reading assignment.

>>

>> **June 7 - Introduction/A History of the Homosexual Rights Movement**

>>

>>> > Read Chapter One and Two: _GLBT Public Policy Issues_

>>>

>>> * **Links**

>>>

>>> [ Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual
History](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/afs/cs.cmu.edu/user/scotts/bulgarians/history-
pg.html)

>>> [Partial List of Famous
Queers:](http://www.efn.org/~mastrait/famousqueers.html)

>>> [History - Herstory, CyberQueer
Lounge](http://www.cyberzine.org/html/GLAIDS/History/historypage.html#general)

>>> [The Other Queer Page: History and
Herstory](http://www.qworld.org/friends/toqp/hisherstory.html)

>>> [Gerber/Hart Library & Archives](http://www.gerberhart.org/)

>>>  
>>>  
>>

>> **June 9 - The Battle Lines are Drawn**

>>

>>> Read Chapter One: _Coming Home to America_

>>

>> * _Supplemental Readings -_

>>

>> Chapter 1 - _Perfect Enemies_

>>

>> Rutledge, L. W. (1992). _Gay Decades_. New York: Penguin Books USA.

>>

>> Vaid, U. (1995). _Virtual Equality_. New York: Anchor Books/Doubleday.
(pages 35 - 68).

>>

>> **Links**

>>

>> [ Gay and Lesbian Politics: WWW and Internet
Resources](http://ezinfo.ucs.indiana.edu/~sanderss/gaylespolguide.html)

>> [Lesbian and Gay History, Politics, and
Culture](http://maxweber.hunter.cuny.edu/polsc/ksherrill/engl860.html)

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> **June 14**

>>

>>> > _Monday, June 14 - No class_

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> **June 16 - Homosexuality and Politics**

>>

>>> > Read Chapter Two - _Coming Home to America_

>>>

>>> * _Supplemental Reading_ -

>>>

>>> D'Emilio, J. (1992). _Making Trouble: Essays on gay history, politics, and
the university_. New York: Routledge. (chapters 3  & 14)

>>>

>>> Vaid, U. (1995). _Virtual Equality_. New York: Anchor Books/Doubleday.
(pp. 106 - 147).

>>>

>>> Chapter 2 - _Perfect Enemies_

>>>

>>> **Links**

>>>

>>> [ Gays and Lesbians in
Government](http://www.geocities.com/WestHollywood/3696/)

>>> [TurnOUT!](http://www.turnleft.com/out/)

>>> ["Abnormal, Wrong, Unnatural and Perverse:" Taking the Measure (9) of the
Closet](http://english-www.hss.cmu.edu/cultronix/Kent/default.html)

>>

>>  
>>

>> **June 21 - Continue discussion from last session**

>>

>>> > Read Chapter Three: _GLBT Public Policy Issues_

>>>

>>> * _Supplemental Readings_ -

>>>

>>> Newton, D. (1994). _Gay and Lesbian Rights_. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
(pp. 93 - 139)

>>>

>>> Vaid, U. (1995). _Virtual Equality_. New York: Anchor Books/Doubleday. (
pp. 69 - 105).

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> **June 23 - - Homophobia**

>>

>>> > Readings to be distributed in class.

>>>

>>> * **Links**

>>>

>>> [ Project Open Mind](http://www.pflag.org/pom/pom2.html)

>>> [The Awareness Project - Main Page](http://www.swlink.net/~aware/)

>>> [GLAAD, Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against
Defamation](http://www.glaad.org/index.html)

>>

>>  
>>

>> * * *

>>

>> **June 28 - Homosexuality and the Military**

>>

>>> > _Supplemental Readings_ -

>>>

>>> * Steffan, J. (1993) _Gays and the Military_. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.

>>>

>>> Anderson, C.W., & Smith, H.R. (1993) Stigma and Honor: Gay, Lesbian, and
Bisexual People in the U.S. Military. In Diamant, L. (Ed.), _Homosexual Issues
in the Workplace_. Washington, DC: Taylor and Francis.

>>>

>>> **Links**

>>>

>>> [ Gays in the
Military](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/afs/cs.cmu.edu/user/scotts/bulgarians/military-
pg.html)

>>> [Info on Gays in the Military](http://www.qrd.org/qrd/usa/military/)

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> **June 30 - No Special Rights**

>>

>>> > Read **** Chapter Three - _Coming Home to America_

>>>

>>> * _Supplemental Readings_ -

>>>

>>> Chapter 4 or 5 - _Perfect Enemies_

>>>

>>> Gonsiorek, J.C. (1993) Threat, Stress, and Adjustment: Mental Health and
the Workplace for Gay and Lesbian Individuals. In Diamant, L. (Ed.),
_Homosexual Issues in the Workplace_. Washington, DC: Taylor and Francis.

>>>

>>> ** **

>>>

>>> **Links**

>>>

>>> [ CNN - Civil rights or special rights? - May 21,
1996](http://www.cnn.com/US/9605/21/gay.reax/index.html)

>>> [Captial Gains and Losses: Main Menu](http://www.ngltf.org/cgal.html)

>>> [Welcome to Task Force ONLINE!](http://www.ngltf.org/)

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> **July 5**

>>

>>> > Monday July 5 - No Class

>>

>> **July 7 - Violence**

>>

>>> > Read Chapters Eleven and Twelve: _GLBT Public Policy Issues_

>>>

>>> * _Supplemental Readings_ -

>>>

>>> Jay, K., & Young, A. (1992). _Out of the Closets: Voices of Gay
Liberation_. New York: New York University Press. (chapter 3)

>>>

>>> Hunter, N., Michaelson, S., & Stoddard, T. (1993). _The Rights of Lesbians
and Gay Men._ Edwardsville, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.

>>>

>>> Chapter 6 - _Perfect Enemies_

>>>

>>> **Links**

>>>

>>> [ WELCOME TO THE HUMAN RIGHTS CAMPAIGN](http://www.hrcusa.org/)

>>> [Illinois Federation For Human
Rights](http://www.suba.com/~ifhr/ifhr.html)

>>> [Illinois QRD Home Page](http://www.qrd.org/qrd/www/usa/illinois/)

>>> [Hate Crimes Fact Sheet](http://www.pflag.org/pom/hate.html)

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> **July 12 - Family Values**

>>

>>> > Read Chapter Four, _Coming Home to America_

>>>

>>> * **Links**

>>>

>>> [ Traditional Values Coaliton Home
Page](http://www.traditionalvalues.org/)

>>> [Mission Statement For Gay and Lesbian Family Values Home
Page](http://www.angelfire.com/co/GayFamilyValues/mission.html)

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> **July 14 - New Family Paradigms**

>>

>>> > Read Chapters 9 & 10: _GLBT Public Policy Issues_

>>>>

>>>> _Supplemental Readings -_

>>>

>>> * Peplau, L. A. (1991). "Lesbian and Gay Relationships" in Gonsiorek,
J.C., & Weinrich, J.D. (Eds.). _Homosexuality: Research Implications for
Public Policy_. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications Inc.

>>>

>>> Green, G.D., & Bozett, F.W. (1991). Lesbian Mothers and Gay Fathers. In
Gonsiorek, J.C., & Weinrich, J.D. (Eds.), _Homosexuality: Research
Implications for Public Policy_. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications Inc.

>>>

>>> Mohr, R. (1994). _A More Perfect Union_. Boston: Beacon Press.

>>>

>>> Pool, G. (1996) "Victims of Circumstance. In Osborne, K.L., & Spurlin,
W.J. (Eds.), _Reclaiming the Heartland._ Minneapolis, MN: University of
Minnesota Press.

>>>

>>> **Links**

>>>

>>> [ DP Benefits in Wisconsin and the
Midwest](http://www.execpc.com/~dross/pol/)

>>> [Collected Domestic Partner
Information](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/afs/cs.cmu.edu/user/scotts/domestic-
partners/mainpage.html)

>>

>>  
>>

>> * * *

>>

>> **July 19 - Growing up Gay/Education Issues**

>>

>>> > Read Chapter Six, Seven and Eight: _GLBT Public Policy Issues_

>>>>

>>>> _Supplemental Readings_ -

>>>

>>> * Fassinger, R. E. (1993) And Gladly Teach: Lesbian and Gay Issues in
Education. In Diamant, L. (Ed.), _Homosexual Issues in the Workplace_.
Washington, DC: Taylor and Francis.

>>>

>>> Sedgewick, E.K. (1993). How to bring your kids up gay. In Warner, M.
(Ed.), _Fear of a Queer Planet_. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

>>>

>>> Woog, D. (1995) _School's Out_. Boston, MA: Allyson Publications. (pp. 320
- 348).

>>>

>>> **links**

>>>

>>> [ The Rural Organizing
Project](http://www.teleport.com/~ctna/rop/index.html)

>>> [Melancholic Side of The
Moon](http://www.eskimo.com/~schop/moon/moon.html)

>>> [Page One](http://www.gallaudet.edu/~12smcgra/titleone.html)

>>> [The GLB Youth Advisor](http://www.qcfurball.com/cat/glb/glb.html)

>>> [Teen Suicide Fact Sheet](http://www.pflag.org/pom/teen.html)

>>

>>  
>>

>> * * *

>>

>> ** **

>>

>> **July 21 - Health**

>>

>>> > Read Chapters Four and Five: _GLBT Public Policy Issues_

>>>>

>>>> _Supplemental Readings_ -

>>>

>>> * Newton, D. (1994). _Gay and Lesbian Rights_. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-
CLIO. (pp. 93 - 139)

>>>

>>> Roth, N.L., & Carman, J. (1993). Risk Perception and HIV Legal Issues in
the Workplace. In Diamant, L. (Ed.), _Homosexual Issues in the Workplace_.
Washington, DC: Taylor and Francis.

>>>

>>> Shilts, R. (1987) _And The Band Played On_. _Politics, People, and the
AIDS Epidemic_. New York: St. Martin's Press.

>>>

>>> Vaid, U. (1995). _Virtual Equality_. New York: Anchor Books/Doubleday. (
pp. 69 - 105).

>>>

>>> **Links**

>>>

>>> [ HRC QUARTERLY SPRING 96 - Pg
14](http://www.hrc.org/hrc/hrcq/hrcq96sp/pg14.html)

>>> [Health Care Information Resources -- Gay & Lesbian Health
Links](http://www-hsl.mcmaster.ca/tomflem/gay.html)

>>> [AIDS Coalition To Unleash Power (ACT
UP)](http://www.yahoo.com/Health/Diseases_and_Conditions/AIDS_HIV/Organizations/AIDS_Coalition_To_Unleash_Power__ACT_UP_/)

>>> [Naming the Enemy](http://english-www.hss.cmu.edu/cultronix/boon/)

>>> [Names Project](http://www.aidsquilt.org/)

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> **July 26 & 28 - Religion**

>>

>>> > Read Chapter Five- _Coming Home to America_

>>>

>>> * _Supplemental Readings_ -

>>>

>>> Vaid, U. (1995). _Virtual Equality_. New York: Anchor Books/Doubleday.
(pp. 307 - 345).

>>>

>>> McSpadden, J. R. Jr. (1993). Homosexuality and the Church. In Diamant, L.
(Ed.), _Homosexual Issues in the Workplace_. Washington, DC: Taylor and
Francis.

>>>

>>> Read Chapter 8 - _Perfect Enemies_

>>>

>>> **Links**

>>>

>>> [ Christian Coalition](http://cc.org/)

>>> [The anti - Pat Robertson/Christian Coalition
site](http://www.geocities.com/CapitolHill/7027/patrobertson.html)

>>> [Pushing Propaganda from the Pulpit: The Christian Coalition's 1996 Voters
Guides](http://www.pfaw.org/press/guidepr.htm)

>>> [Religion and Homosexuality](http://members.aol.com/gunnyding/christ.htm)

>>> [Yahoo Links to LGB and
Religion](http://www.yahoo.com/Society_and_Culture/Lesbian__Gay_and_Bisexual/Religion/)

>>>

>>>  
>>

>> **

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> **

>>

>> ## **Bibliography**

>>

>> **Books and Articles on Reserve in the Library**

>> *  
>>

>>   * D'Emilio, J. (1992). _Making Trouble: Essays on gay history, politics,
and the university_. New York: Routledge.

>>   * Diamant, L. (Ed.). _Homosexual Issues in the Workplace_. Washington,
DC: Taylor and Francis.

>>   * Gallagher, J. (1996). _Perfect Enemies._ New York, NY: Crown Publishing

>>   * Gonsiorek, J. C., & Weinrich, J. D. (Eds.). (1991). _Homosexuality:
Research Implications for Public Policy_. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications
Inc.

>>   * Hunter, N., Michaelson, S., & Stoddard, T. (1993) _The Rights of
Lesbians and Gay Men._ Edwardsville, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.

>>   * Jay, K., & Young, A. (1992). _Out of the Closets: Voices of Gay
Liberation_. New York: New York University Press.

>>   * Mohr, R. (1994). _A More Perfect Union_. Boston: Beacon Press.

>>   * Newton, D. (1994). _Gay and Lesbian Rights_. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-
CLIO.

>>   * Osborne, K.L., & Spurlin, W.J. (Eds.). (1996). _Reclaiming the
Heartland_. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.

>>   * Rubenstein, W.B. (1993), _Lesbians Gay Men and the Law._ New York, NY:
Norton

>>   * Rutledge, L. W. (1992). _Gay Decades_. New York: Penguin Books USA.

>>   * Shilts, R. (1987) _And The Band Played On_. _Politics, People, and the
AIDS Epidemic_. New York: St. Martin's Press.

>>   * Steffan, J. (1993) _Gays and the Military_. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.

>>   * Vaid, U. (1995). _Virtual Equality_. New York: Anchor Books/Doubleday.

>>   * Warner, M. (1993). _Fear of a Queer Planet_. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.

>>   * Woog, D. (1995) _School's Out_. Boston, MA: Allyson Publications.

>>

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> <\-- [Back to Homepage](http://www.uis.edu/~cook/pac/)

