[![](amstlogo.gif)](index.shtml)** | [![](um.gif)](http://www.umd.edu/)  
---|---  
 [contact](mailto:vb33@umail.umd.edu?subject=Question+from+AMST+Website) *
[feedback](mailto:veghs@otal.umd.edu?subject=AMST+Website+Feedback) *
[print](javascript:printpage\(self.document.location.href\)) |  
  
  
---  
|  
---  
[![Overview: particulars, curriculum,
purpose](images/mb1.gif)](overview.shtml)  
[![Who We Are: Faculty, Students, and
Staff](images/mb2.gif)](instructors.shtml)  
[![Research & Scholarship: Academic Research Projects at the
Department](images/mb3.gif)](projects.shtml)  
[![Undergraduate Studies: Resources and Information for Current and Incoming
Undergraduate Students](images/mb4.gif)](undergrad.shtml)  
[![Graduate Studies: Resources and Information for Current and Incoming
Graduate Students](images/mb5.gif)](prospective.shtml)  
[![Courses: List of Current and Past AMST
Courses](images/mb6.gif)](courses.shtml)  
[![Administrative Policies](images/mb7.gif)](adminpolicies.shtml)  
[![Student Organizations](images/mb8.gif)](studentorgs.shtml)  
|

**[resources for current students](gradresources.shtml) | [resources for
incoming students](orientation.shtml) | [area resources](resources.shtml)**

**Graduate Students**

  
Gilda Anroman _(ganroman@eng.umd.edu)_

> Gilda is I a Ph.D. candidate. Her research interests include environmental
history, Colonial American history, and environmental health policy. Her
dissertation is on environment, health, society and politics in Philadelphia,
1682-1793 - it is an interdisciplinary analysis.

[Sarah Dangelas](http://www.wam.umd.edu/~dangelas/welcome.html)
_(sd137@umail.umd.edu)_

> Sarah is a Ph.D. student concentrating on cultural landscape studies and
historic preservation. She is interested in how we present our cultural
history to the public at historic sites. She teaches AMST 205: Meaning in
Place: Cultural Landscape Studies. See her [Fall 2001 syllabus
here](http://www.wam.umd.edu/~dangelas/fall01/fall01.htm).

[Debra DeRuyver](http://www.wam.umd.edu/~toad/) _(dd131@umail.umd.edu)_

> Debra is a doctoral student and co-chair of the American Studies
Association's Students' Committee. Her research coalesces around performance
theory, the body, and technologies.

Beth E. Graybill _(B_Graybill@acad.fandm.edu)_

> I am ABD in American Studies at UMCP (John Caughey is my advisor).
Dissertation title: "Negotiating Business: the Strategies of Amish Women
Entreprenuers in the Lancaster County, Pa., Tourist Market"  
>  
>  Research interests include: gender and material culture, women and
religion, women's work and small-business entreprenuership

Elizabeth M. Hagovsky _(sinisterwisdom@yahoo.com)_

> Status: M.A. Candidate  
>  Interest: film theory/production with a specific focus on documentaries and
ethnographic film

Bailey Kier _(vkier@wam.umd.edu)_

> Bailey is a 1st year student enrolled in the Ph. D program. Her research
interests include the intersections of gender, class, race, and sexuality. She
focuses on the connections, contradictions, and the meshing of queer and
working class cultures.

Ed Martini _(emartini@wam.umd.edu)_

> Ed is a doctoral student and graduate instructor. His interests include 20th
Century U.S. history, schooling and American culture, and cyberculture. Ed's
dissertation argues that the United States actually won the American War in
Vietnam by fighting another war, which he calls  "The American War on Vietnam
1975-1995." He's also involved in the [Chesapeake Chapter of the
ASA](http://otal.umd.edu/amst/chasa/) and the [Cyberculture Working
Group](http://otal.umd.edu/amst/cwg/).

[Larry D. McReynolds](http://www.glue.umd.edu/~lmcrey/) _(lmcrey@wam.umd.edu)_

> Larry's main interest is Gay/Lesbian/Queer Studies and Native American
Studies. He studies gender, race, and sexuality issues across various fields.
Specifically, he has completed research in the areas of advertising,
linguistics, postmodern culture,  "cyber-education," and the politics of
coming-out. His main research, however, focuses on turn-of-the-century gay
autobiography. He currently has a fellowship with the American Studies
Association and hopes to teach a class in Native American issues.

Krista Park _(krista.park@verizon.net)_

> Krista Park is a doctoral student concentrating on ethnography and the
collision of rural and urban cultures. She is also interested in queer studies
and cyberculture.

[Barbara Shaw Perry](http://www.inform.umd.edu/amst/gradstudents/BPerry/)
_(bs86@umail.umd.edu)_

> Barbara Shaw Perry is working toward her Ph.D. Her dissertation examines
Caribbean women's migration narratives to and from the metropoles of the US
(New York) and UK (London). General research interests include: women's
literature, Caribbean Studies, Postcolonial Studies and feminist theory.
Teaching interests span women's studies, cultural studies, postcolonial
theory, and social justice issues.

Maura Pierce _(mpierce@c-span.org)_

> Maura is a masters student and is the History Producer at
[C-SPAN](http://www.c-span.org/). She works with media liaisons, curators, and
other specialists at the Library of Congress, National Archives (including the
presidential libraries), the Smithsonian, and other institutions where history
is preserved and archived to provide visual information on past events.

[Donna Rowe](http://www.wam.umd.edu/~drowe/testpage.html)
_(dr70@umail.umd.edu)_

> Donna Rowe is a Ph.D. candidate in American Studies at the University of
Maryland. Her research focuses on the ways in which current imprisonment
policies in the United States provide a sexist, racist and classist response
to social problems caused by poverty, mental illness, and drug dependence. By
focusing on contemporary prison narratives of incarcerated women, Rowe
explores the invisibility and attempts to give voice to a class of women whose
experiences are absent from discourses about race, gender and criminal justice
public policy.

Shelby Shapiro _(shelshap@wam.umd.edu)_

> Shelby's academic interest include Ethnic Studies  & Immigration, in
particular the Yiddish press. For the past several years he has done research
on two Yiddish middle-class women's magazines published in New York City, one
from 1913-14, the other from 1922-23. He has lectured on Jewish gangsterism in
the U. S., as well as Jazz & Blues diversity.

Deborah Retzky Shaul _(sdbeach@aol.com)_

> Deborah is a high school English teacher and a Ph.D. candidate. Her
dissertation focuses on three Jewish women's philanthropic volunteer groups:
the NCJW; Hadassah; and the National Federation of Temple Sisterhoods. She
examines how these organizations, from 1893-1925, encouraged their members to
write works of fiction and poetry, and how these organizations served as a
springboard for publication with Jewish presses and more secular, mainstream
presses. Deborah lives in San Diego with her husband and new daughter, Anna.

[Donald Snyder](http://www.glue.umd.edu/~dsnyder) _(dsnyder@otal.umd.edu)_

> Donald Snyder is a ph.d. student interested in cyberculture and popular
culture. His current project examines the practice and practicing of sex and
sexuality on the Internet.

[Judy Solberg](http://gwis2.circ.gwu.edu/~judys/index.html)
_(judys@gwis2.circ.gwu.edu)_

> Judy is working on her dissertation in her limited free time after spending
her day as a librarian at George Washington University. At Gelman Library, she
is responsible for government documents as well as being the subject
specialist for the communication program, the school of media and public
affairs and the graduate school of political management. Her dissertation
focuses on mystery and detective fiction readers and their engagement in fan
activities.

[Yumei Sun](http://chinatrans.com/yumei/) _(yumei@chinatrans.com)_

> Yumei Sun is a Ph.D. student in American Studies, specializing in early
twentieth century Chinese American history. Her dissertation studies the role
of a Chinese-language newspaper in the transformation of San Francisco's
Chinatown from 1900-1920.

Tara Tetrault _(Tetrault@gte.net)_

> Tara is a doctoral student in American Studies at the University of
Maryland. Her research focuses on using archaeology and material culture to
interpret the lifeways of early African Americans. She is interested in how
American culture grew out of traditions introduced by Africans and Europeans.

Catherine Stewart Thomas _(sbcsthomas@yahoo.com)_

> Catherine is a Master's student concentrating on 18th and 19th century
material culture and historic preservation. She also has full-time job as
Assistant Curator of Decorative Arts at the Baltimore Museum of Art.

[Sandor Vegh](http://amst.umd.edu/~veghs/)
_(veghs@nospam.otal.stillnospam.umd.nospamever.edu)_

> Sandor Vegh is a Ph.D. candidate working on his dissertation ("Control and
Resistance Online") that deals with the (un)democratizing uses of the Internet
in the theoretical framework of a dialectical power struggle between the elite
and the public, invoking concepts of control and hegemony, resistance and
subversion. His specific research focuses on online political activism
("hacktivism") and its media representation.

Greg Wahl _(grwahl@wam.umd.edu)_

> Greg is interested in Popular Culture, especially popular music and genre
fiction. His dissertation in progress is on _The Bridges of Madison County_
and its impact on Iowa.

[Psyche A. Williams Forson](http://otal.umd.edu/~sojournr)
_(sojournr@wam.umd.edu)_

> Psyche Williams-Forson is a doctoral candidate in the area of African
American material culture. Her dissertation research focuses on the
stereotypes of African American consumption of chicken and explores how
objects are manipulated to exert power and control. The dissertation also
examines a relative feminine domain, foodways, to argue how African American
women used "kitchen culture" as part of the many political strategies aimed at
reinscribing and reshaping vestiges of American American heritages and
traditions. She has published portions of her work in the article, "Suckin'
the Chicken Bone Dry": African American Women, Fried Chicken, and the Power of
a National Narrative," _Cooking Lessons: The Politics of Gender and Food_ ,
Sherrie Inness, ed. Psyche is currently teaching at Western Maryland College
in the Department of English as an Assistant Professor.  
  
---  
| Copyright (C) 2001 by American Studies |
[Credits](javascript:alert\('Designed by Sandor Vegh.\\nContent organization
by Claudia Rector'\))  
---|---  
  
[![](images/mb2_1.gif)](faculty.shtml)  
[![](images/mb2_2.gif)](affiliate.shtml)  
[![](images/mb2_3.gif)](students.shtml)  
[![](images/mb2_4.gif)](staff.html)

[![](images/mb4_1.gif)](undergradc.shtml)  
[![](images/mb4_2.gif)](undergrad.shtml)

[![](images/mb5_1.gif)](students.shtml)  
[![](images/mb5_2.gif)](prospective.shtml)

