  
_**ADMINISTRATIVE LAW**_  
**Political Science 4/551**

  

**_Instructor_ :**     N.D. Hunter  
                      Morris Hall  109C  
                      Phone: 389-6940 | **_Office Hours:_   **8:00-10:00 Daily  
_**E-Mail:**_ nevin.hunter@mankato.msus.edu  
---|---  
  


_**Text**_ : | Welter Gellhorn and Clark Byse, _Administrative Law: Cases and
Comments_. 9th edition.  
---|---  
  


_**Academic Policies**_ :  | _**Attendance**_ : Each student is required to
attend the lectures. The lectures are an integral part of the course and
necessary to obtain a full understanding of the subject.  
---|---  
| _**Incompletes:**_ No incomplete grade designation will be administered
unless documented reasons for doing so are given to the instructor by the
student.  
| _**Make-up Exams:**_ No make-up exams will be administered unless documented
reasons for doing so are given to the instructor by the student.  
  


**_Examinations_** |  There will be two essay examinations administered. The
final examination is comprehensive in scope. The mid-term examination is worth
100 points and will count for one third of your grade. The final examination
is worth 200 points and will count for two thirds of year grade. 270 to 300
points will earn yon an "A"; 240 to 269 points will earn yon a "E"; 210 to 239
points will earn yon a "C"; 180 to 209 points will earn you a "D"; and, any
points below 179 will earn yon an "F'.  
---|---  
  


**_Course Purpose_** |  To study the legal procedures by which state and
federal administrative agencies exercise legislative, judicial and executive
powers. Emphasis is placed on the constitutional position of administrative
agencies, the rule making process, the power of agencies to decide rights and
obligations of persons in individual cases, and judicial control of
administrative action.  
---|---  
  
**_Comments_**  
This course assumes that the student will have taken at least an American
government course  
and also possesses a basic understanding of government organization. The
reading in the  
course is challenging but fascinating and most instructive. The lectures will
unravel the cases for  
you and should also give you information about how the  "real" American
government works  
as we approach the 21st Century. Classroom attendance is critical for maximum
student  
performance.  

**To request accommodation for disabilities, please contact the instructor.**

       

[Course Outline  ](AdLaw.html#COURSE OUTLINE AND READING ASSIGNMENT)  | [Legal
Research](AdLaw.html#LEGAL RESEARCH) |   [Briefing Cases](AdLaw.html#BRIEFING
CASES) | [3x5 Card File](AdLaw.html#3 x 5 CARD FILE) | [Basic Legal
Terms](AdLaw.html#SOME BASIC LEGAL TERMS)  
---|---|---|---|---  
  


  
_**COURSE OUTLINE AND READING ASSIGNMENT**_  

1.  An Introduction to Administrative Law - page 1  
            A. What is Administrative Law?  
            B. What is an Administrative Agency?  
            C. The Development of the Administrative State - page 13  
            D.  Executive and Independent Agencies - page 34  
            E. Agency Functioning - page 40  
                    1\.   Executive Decision - page 41  
                    2\. Rulemaking - page 43  
                    3\. Adjudication - page 46  
            F. Agencies in the Web of Government - page 47  

2.  The Constitutional Framework for Administration - page 51  
            A. Constitutional Limits on the Powers Agencies Can Be Given - page 67  
                    1\.   Delegation of the Authority to Make Rules of Conduct - page 67  
                    2\.   Delegation of Enforcement Authority - page 112  
                    3\.   Delegation of Authority to Resolve Disputes - page 116  
            B. The Place of Agencies in Government - page 138  
                    1\. Issues of Constitutional Structure - page 138  
                    2\.   Agencies in the Web of Government - page 191  
     

3.  The Exercise of Administrative Power - Rulemaking and Adjudication - page 226  
            A. Fundamental Procedural Categories of Administrative Action - page 226  
                    1\.   The Constitution - page 226  
                    2\.   The Fundamental Statute - page 238  
            B. The Procedural Categories in Action - page 256  
                    1\.   Formal Adjudication as an Administrative Process - page 256  
                    2\.   Informal Rulemaking as an Administrative Process - page 291  
                    3\.   Formal Rulemaking as an Administrative Process - page 339  
                    4\.   Informal Adjudication as am Administrative Process - page 361  
            C. Agency Discretion in Choosing Between Rulmaking and Adjudication  
                    1\. Choosing a Policymaking Model - page 417  
                    2\. Issues of Retroactivity and Prospectivity - page 436  
            D. The Role of Private Parties in Shaping Administrative Proceedings - page 464

[Top of Page](AdLaw.html#ADMINISTRATIVE LAW)

  
_**LEGAL RESEARCH**_  

_**LEGAL CITATION**_  

The first element in a legal citation is the name of the case, i.e. _Colman v.
Miller_.   The name of the case is followed by a citation, thus:  307 U.S.
433, 59 S. Ct. 972, 83 L. Ed. 1385 (1939). This is a complete standard
citation of a decision of the United States Supreme Court.  It lists three
different places where the decision may be found. Any one of the three is
sufficient for most purposes.  If only one is listed, the official one (the
first of the three above), is preferred.  Publishers often list all three for
the convenience of the reader. Each citation (e.g., 307 U.S. 433) contains
three elements: the volume number, an abbreviation of the title of the series
of reports, and the page number where the case decision report begins.  Thus,
"307 U.S. 433" means that the decision in the case of _Colman v. Miller_ will
be found in VOLUME 307 of _U.S. REPORTS. CASES AD.IUDCED IN THE SUPREME COURT.
OCTOBER TERM._ 1938, beginning at 433.  

The other two citations refer to verbatim commercial reprints of the official
reports.  "59 S. CT. 972" refers to Volume 59 of the _Supreme Court Reporter_.
published by West Publishing Co. of St. Paul, Minnesota, page 972.   "83 L.
Ed. 1385" refers to Volume 83 or _UNITED STATES SUPREME COURT REPORTS.
LAWYER'S EDITION_. Published by the Lawyer's Cooperative Publishing Co. of
Rochester, New York, page 1385.  

The _Supreme Court Reoprter_ (S. CT) only goes back to the year 1882. The
Lawyer's Edition (L. ED) covers the whole history of the Court as does the
official series.   The editors chose to number the first volume after volume
100, Volume 1, 2nd series, rather than volume 101.  Thus, a recent citation to
the Lawyer's Edition reads:  _BAKER v. CARR_. 1/L Ed. 2nd 663 (1962).  

Prior to 1875, the volumes of the official _REPORTS_ were named after the
court reporter.   Hence, the case of _Marbury v. Madison_ instead of being
cited as  "S U.S. 137," is normally cited as "1 Cr. 137."  This means that the
case will be found in the first volume reported by Cranch, who was the
official court reporter from 1801 to 1815.  The complete series of the U.S.  

_REPORTS_ includes the following:  

1789-1800 | 4 | volumes | reported | by | Dallas | (Deli.)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1801-1815 | 9 | " | " | " | " | (Cr.)  
1816-1827 | 12 | " | " | " | " | (Wh.)  
1828-1842 | 16 | " | " | " | " | (Pet.)  
1843-1860  | 24 | " | " | " | " | (How.)  
1861-1862  | 2 | " | " | " | " | (BI.)  
1863-1874  | 23 | " | " | " | " | (Wall.)  
  
  
From 1875 on the volumes are numbered consecutively without reference to the
reporter, beginning with Volume 91 - in as much as from the first volume of
Dallas to the 23rd volume of Wallace comprises 90 volumes. In recent years
some writers have adopted the practice of citing old cases as though the
volume numbering system begun in 1875 had begun with the first periods.  Thus,
_Marbury v. Madison_ may be cited as  "5 U.S. 137."

In principle, all legal citation follows the same pattern.   Even legal
periodicals tend to be cited after the manner of case citations.   Thus, "73
Harv. L. Rev. 84" refers to Volume 73 of the _Harvard Law Review_. Page 84.
Familiarity with abbreviation employed comes with practice.   A table of
abbreviations of court reports app ear in the last 85 pages of _Black's Law
Dictionary_. and a comprehensive list of abbreviations for periodicals as well
as reports appears in _A Uniform System of Citation_. a pamphlet issued
jointly by the Columbia Law Review, the Harvard Law Review, the University of
Pennsylvania Law Review and Yale Law Journal.   A few citations of greatest
interest to students in this class are:

Fed. Cas                       _Federal Cases_.   U.S. District Court and U.S.
Circuit Court  
Cases prior to 1880.

F. (Reporter)                 U.S. District Court and U.S. Courts of Appeals
Cases, 1880-1932 and U.S. Courts of Appeals and
U.S. Court of Custom and Patent Appeals, from 1932 to the present.

F. Supp.                        _Federal Supplement._   U.S. District Court
Cases since 1932.

P. 2nd                          _Pacific_. 2nd series, The National Reporter
Systems reports of cases in the state courts in the Pacific
region (including the State of Washington).  The second series began in 1931.
The earlier series, up to                                      1931, is cited
in "PAC."  The other reports in the National Reporter System, covering state
cases since                                      the early 1880's are A
(Atlantic) and N.E. (Northeast) and N.W., S.E., and S.W.

Just as the reports of cases in the U.S. Supreme Court appear in "U.S.," "S.
Ct." and 'LL. Ed,)) SO state decisions often appear in official state reports
and in commercial reprints. For example: _Martin v. State_ , 163 Ark. 103, 259
S.W. 6 33 A.L.R. 133 (1924) - Arkansas, Southwest and American Law Reports,
respectively.

Sometimes a fourth element will appear in a citation, showing the exact page
where a particular passage appears. 354 U.S. 267, 284 cites a particular
passage on page 284 in a case which begins at page 267 of volume 354.
Sometimes the word "at" is used rather than the comma between the third and
fourth element, and sometimes the third element is left out when the word at
is used.  For example, the passage just mentioned could be cited 354 U.S. 267,
285 or 354 U.S. 267 at 284 or 354 U.S. at 284.

[Top of Page](AdLaw.html#ADMINISTRATIVE LAW)

_**BRIEFING CASES**_

  
An attorney going before an appellate court sends ahead to the court a
statement of the case he/she will make when he/she appears. That statement,
supported with appropriate citations, is called a  "brief." Students of the
law make notes on each of the cases they study and they call such notes after
the attorney's brief.  A student's brief contains these ten elements:  

1.    Name of the Case  
2.    Citations  
3.    Date  
4.    Character of the action  
5.    Facts  
6.    Issues  
7.    Decision  
8.    Opinion of the Court  
9.    Concurring and/or dissenting opinions  
10.  Comments (i.e., the student's comments)  

For example:             Southern Pacific Co. v. Arizona  
                                325 U.S. 761 (1945)  
                                Appeal from the Supreme Court of Arizona

Facts:                      S.P. Co. ran trains longer than the 14 passenger
or 70 freight car maximum set by 1912  
                                Arizona statute Arizona sued S.P. in state court which ruled in favor of S.P. supreme court reversed.

Issues:                      1\.    Has Congress by statute restricted power
of states to regulate length of interstate trains as a safety
measure?

Decision 1.  No  
Opinion of the Court (Stone, C.J.)

While states may make minor regulations of commerce in order to preserve an
overriding state concern, they may not interpose a substantial burden upon
commerce by a health provision under a "police power" and certainly not here
where the total effect of the safety measure is "slight or problematical."
More short trains appear to cause as many accidents as fewer longer ones and
the effect of the Arizona train limit law is greater costs, inefficiency, and
delay.

Concurring and Dissenting Opinion by:

            Rutledge concurs in result.   
            Black dissents:          The Court is wrongly acting as a "super legislature."  
            Douglas dissents:        Leave this matter to ICC and, ultimately to Congress.  

Comments: CF. Black's views re-state restraint of individuals, as opposed to
corporations. Douglas seems to adopt                     "concurrent" view.

[Top of Page](AdLaw.html#ADMINISTRATIVE LAW)

_**3 x 5 CARD FILE**_

  
A useful device is a 3 x 5 card catalog of all the cases considered during the
course. The card should be, in effect, a  "Bash card;" i.e., a brief of the
brief described above. Such a catalog is very helpful in preparing for
examinations and for future reference. It is almost indispensable for anyone
taking the field examinations for advanced degrees. Prepare thecard with
telegraphic brevity. Arrange them as the material is ordered in your mind. The
Arizona train limit case, briefed above, would appear somewhat as follows:

Southern Pacific Co. v. Arizona  
324 U.S. 761  
Appl. S.C. Ariz.

Stone, C.J., or o/c _REVERSE_ Ariz. 1912 Stat. limiting trains to 14 passenger
or 70 freight cars contravenes commerce clause.   Such a safety measure has a
slight or problematical effect and imposes costs, inefficiency and delay on
inter-state commerce. If there is to be such a limit, it must be uniform and
so must be passed by Congress.

RUTLEDGE             concurs in result  
BLACK                  dissents.  Court is here a "super legislature"  
DOUGLAS             dissents.  If Congress wanted to, it could abolish the
Arizona statute. Court should leave to Congress.  
COMMENTS         CF.  Black's civil liberties.  Douglas adopts "concurrent"
view.  Stone follows  _Cooley v. Port Warden._  

[ Top of Page](AdLaw.html#ADMINISTRATIVE LAW)

_

**SOME BASIC LEGAL TERMS**_

The following definitions are given with this warning. Brief definitions are
almost always over-simple. In the study of law, you will find most of these
definitions qualified or elaborated. The definitions are to be regarded as
_general_ and subject to many exemptions and refinements; they are for the use
of _College_ students, not Law students.

Terms not given here will be found in any standard law dictionary (Black's or
Bouvier's) or even in any unabridged general dictionary. These are all in the
Reference Room in the University Library.

_

Latin terms_ and maxims should be looked up in a law dictionary where they
will be found listed alphabetically (in Black's) or under the word _maxim_ (in
Bouvier's). These maxims have meanings which are idiomatic, so that even a
good classical scholar might not give them the precise meaning which they have
in the law.

* * *

_

**Amicus Curiae**_ (friend of the court) A person, usually a lawyer who is not
one of the parties to the case before the court, but who files a brief or
gives other information bearing upon the case. Thus, the American Bar
Association may file a brief as _amicus curiae_ in an important civil liberty
case.

_

**Appeal**_ Since 1928 (when the writ of error was abolished) appeal is the
only procedure by which a litigant can take his case into the Supreme Court
from a lower court as a _matter of right._ In this respect, it differs from
certiorari which brings a case into the Supreme Court, only if the Court _in
its_ discretion decides to review it.

_

**Appellant**_ One who appeals to a higher court for judicial decision or
decree. He/she may have been the defendant in the lower court.

_

**Appellate Jurisdiction_ ** The jurisdiction which a superior court has to
rehear or review cases which have been tried in a lower court. It is a general
term and the scope of appellate jurisdiction will depend upon the nature of
the case being reviewed; See _appeal._ _writ of error._ etc.

_

**Appellee**_ The party in a case against whom an appeal is taken to a higher
court.

_

**Arraignment**_ (The  "g" is not pronounced) The calling of a person before a
magistrate or court to answer to the accusation contained in an indictment or
other criminal charge.

_

**Brief**_ The written or printed argument presented to the court by counsel.

_

**Certification**_ In certain matter, review by the Supreme Court may be
brought about, not by the litigants, nor by the Supreme Court itself, but by
the lower court which may send up, or certify, to the Supreme Court questions
of law upon which it wishes an authoritative ruling. It is used mainly by the
circuit courts of appeal. The Supreme Court usually does answer them.

_

**Certiorari**_ (It is to be certified) A review procedure by which an
appellate court, _in it's discretion,_ orders a lower court to send up, or
certify to it, the entire record of a case for purposes of review. A litigant
may _netition_ the Supreme Court to issue certiorari, or the Court may issue
it _on its own_ initiative. But no litigant has a right to it, and vastly more
petitions for certiorari are denied than are granted. The Supreme Court has
discretionary control over its docket by selecting the cases which it is
willing to review. _Certiorari_ is also a judicial proceeding to test the
correctness of an _administrative_ determination in which a court orders the
certification of a decision and the record on which it was based. _Certiorari_
is also a proceeding equivalent to _habeas_ _corpus._ used in the case of non-
bailable offenses.

_

**Complainant**_ One who makes the complaint in a suit or proceeding; the
plaintiff in a suit of equity.

_

**Concurring Opinion_ ** An opinion written by a judge who agrees with the
decision in a case, but who either disagrees with the reasoning by which it is
supported, or prefers to state his/her own reasons.

_

**Contempt**_ Open disobedience to, or disrespect of, the valid rules or
orders of a court, such as a refusal to testify as a witness, disobedience of
an injunction, etc. One may also be in contempt of Congress on one of its
committees by refusing to testify when ordered to do so.

[ Top of Page](AdLaw.html#ADMINISTRATIVE LAW)

_

**Declaratory Judgment**_ a decision of a court which declares the legal
rights of the parties to the case before an injury has been suffered by eltber
of the parties. A declaratory judgment action differs from a normal decision
in that the court renders its judgment without a specific order.

_

**Decree**_ The judgment or sentence of a court of equity.

_

**Defendant**_ One who is sued in a civil action, or is prosecuted in a
criminal action.

_

**Defendant-in-error_ ** The party against whom a writ of error is sued out.

_

**Demurrer**_ A legal way of asking 'So what? " A demurrer is a defense, or
allegation which, by admitting the truth of the facts asserted by the other
side, asserts that they state no crime or cause of action. Thus, if a
defendant demurs to an indictment, he admits for the sake of argument the acts
of which be is accused but claims that they do not constitute the crime. If
his demurrer is overruled by the court, he may then deny the facts which he
admitted in the demurrer.

_

**Deposition**_ Testimony of a witness, under oath, which is reduced to
writing so that it may be introduced in court. May not be used in criminal
cases except in narrowly limited circumstances, since persons on trial for
crimes are entitled to  "confrontation" of witnesses, i.e. seeing' them face
to face.

_

**Dictum**_ (obiter dictum) An opinion expressed by a judge or court, which
not being necessary to the decision of the case, lacks authority as a
precedent. _Dictum_ is sometimes included in a judicial opinion for the
purpose of instructing the bar on a point of law, not squarely before the
court. There is sometimes a dispute as to what is _dictum_ in an opinion and
what is not.

_

**Diversity Jurisdiction**_ That aspect of the jurisdiction of the Federal
Courts which applies to suits between residents of different states.

_

**Ejusdem Generis_ ** Of the same kind. In an enumeration of certain things or
conditions which contain catch-all phrases, the latter is limited to things or
conditions of the same type as those enumerated. Thus, a listing of physical
properties which contains the phrase "and any other thing" would not be
construed to apply to intangible matters.

_

**Equity**_ Equity cannot be defined in a paragraph, and can be understood
only in the light of its history. It is a system of jurisprudence which
differs in origin, theory, and method from the _common law._ Common law, which
developed by custom and judicial decisions, became inflexible, bound by rigid
procedure, limited as to jurisdiction, and therefore incapable in many cases
of affording justice. Courts of equity (known first as chancery courts)
emerged in the late 15tb century in England to provide justice where the
common law courts were unable to do so. Thus, a court of equity may issue an
injunction forbidding a person to violate the rights of another under penalty
of contempt, and thus, prevent a wrong, which a common law court could merely
(with the aid of a jury) award damages to the injured person after the wrong
has been committed. A court of equity _can order a person_ to do or not to do
something, while a common law court can merely determine property rights or
award money damages.

_

**Et. Al._ ** And another; and others.

[Top of Page](AdLaw.html#ADMINISTRATIVE LAW)

_

**Ex rel.**_ (ex relations) On the relations of, i.e., on the narrative of, or
on information given by. A phrase used in the title of certain cases which are
brought on the initiative of the people (state) or the sovereign  "on the
relation oP' a private individual to test the exercise in some form of
executive or administrative authority. See Missouri ex rel. Gains v. Canada,
305 U.S. 337 (1958) (the Missouri Negro law school case). In most cases today
the people (state) are merely a nominal party plaintiff, the determination
whether or not to bring the proceeding still resides in the sovereign,
although control is in the hands of relator. The phrase is used mostly in
proceedings which are known as _mandamus. certiorari. auo warranto._ or
_babeas cornus._ In some jurisdictions and in some cases,  "Ex parte" is an
equivalent title.

_

**Ex parte**_ On one side only; done for, in behalf of, or on the application
of, one party only. In an Ex parte proceeding there is no notice to, or
contestation by any person adversely interested. The phrase is common in
titles of cases arising out of habeas corpus.

_

**Federal Question**_ A case which contains a major issue involving the United
States Constitution or a provision of an Act of Congress or United States
treaty. The jurisdiction of the federal courts in governed, in part, by the
existence of a federal question.

_

**Felony**_ A serious crime for which the punishment usually is either death
or imprisonment in a penitentiary. Compare with misdemeanor, for which the
penalty is less severe, a crime may be a felony in one and a misdemeanor in
another.

_

**Habeas Corpus_ ** Blackstone translates the opening sentence of the great
writ as follows: "That you have or produce the body of the prisoner, with the
day and cause of his caption and detention, to do, submit to, and receive
whatsoever the judge or court awarding such writ shall consider in that
behalf." It is a writ issued by a judge or court on petition, and orders the
person holding another In hrs custody to bring his prisoner before the court
or Judge in order that the legality of his imprisonment may be determined. If
there turns out to be no reason in law for the imprisonment, the prisoner is
at once freed; if there is a cause, arrangements are made for trial, release
on bail, or other appropriate disposition of the case.

_

**Indictment**_ A formal written statement charging a person with a crime,
framed by the prosecuting attorney, and authorized by a grand jury. It differs
from an _information,_ which is a similar accusation resting merely on the
sworn statement of the prosecuting attorney, or a presentment, which is a
similar accusation originating with the grand jury itself.

_

**In forma pauperis**_ In the form of a pauper, as a poor person. Permission
to bring legal action without the payment of required fees for counsel, writs,
transcripts, subpoenas, and the like.

_

**In personam**_ Against a person. A legal proceeding instituted to obtain
decrees or judgment against a person.

_

**In re**_ In the matter of; concerning.

_

**In rem_ ** Against a thing. A legal proceeding instituted to obtain decrees
or judgments against property.

_

**Injunction**_ A writ issued by a court of equity restraining a person from
doing acts deemed unjust and harmful so far as the rights of other parties to
the proceeding are concerned. Thus, one may be enjoined from circulating false
rumors which would injure the business of another. Or one may be enjoined from
maintaining a nuisance on his premises to the injury of his neighbors or the
community. Disobedience of an injunction is contempt of court, punishable by
fine or imprisonment. Injunctions are not issued when the injured or
threatened party would have an adequate common law remedy I such as a suit for
damages. Thus, a man may not be enjoined from refusing to pay his debts. A
jury is not used in injunction cases. A _mandatory injunction_ commands a
person to do a positive act. Thus, he/she is  "enjoined" from continuing to do
nothing to the injury of another.

**_Judgment_** The determination, decision, decree, or sentence of a court.
Also an obligation - to pay money - created by such a court decision, as a
"judgment for debt or damages."

_

**Mandamus**_ (We command) A judicial writ issued to an officer (sometimes a
corporation) ordering the doing of a specific, non-discretionary act, the
doing of which is legal duty. Disobedience of a mandamus is contempt of court.
Mandamus will not be issued to compel the doing of a _discretionary_ act in a
particular way. The act must be ministerial in nature. Thus, if you are
clearly eligible, you probably could get a mandamus to compel the State
Highway Commission to give you a test for a driver's license, since they have
no discretion to refuse, but you could not get a mandamus to compel them to
give you a license as a result of the test, since discretion is involved here.

[ Top of Page](AdLaw.html#ADMINISTRATIVE LAW)

_

**Miscellaneous Docket**_ The docket of the United States Supreme Court on
which are listed all cases filed _inForma pauperis.

**Misdemeanor**_ A criminal offense which does not amount to the grade of a
felony. See felony. Punishment provided by law for a misdemeanor is less
severe _than_ for a felony.

_

**Moot Question_ ** A case which, because of changed circumstances or
conditions after the litigation was begun, no longer contains a justiciable
question.

_

**Original Jurisdiction_ ** The jurisdiction of a court in which a case
starts, in contrast to _appellate jurisdiction._ See appellate jurisdiction.

_

**Per curium**_ (by the Court) An opinion or judgment by the whole branch
rather than by an individual judge. Usually very brief.

_

**Petitioner_ ** One who starts legal proceedings by filing a written
application asking for court action, such as _habeas corpus,_ an _injunction._
etc. The person who opposes what is asked for in a petition is called a
"respondent." A petition is in contrast to a _motion._ which may be oral.

_

**Plaintiff**_ One who commences a suit to obtain a remedy for an injury to
his/her rights.

_

**Plaintiff-in-error**_ One who sues out a writ or error to a judgment or
other proceeding of law. He/she may be the original plaintiff or the original
defendant.

_

**Political Question**_ Issues in a case which the court believes should be
decided by a nonjudicial unit of government.

_

**Prerogative Writ**_ The original process by which administrative action is
reviewed. The writs of mandamus, certiorari, habeas corpus and quo warranto
are forms of the prerogative writ.

_

**Prima Facie_ ** At first glance, without investigation or evaluation. That
which, if not rebutted, is sufficient to establish a fact or case.

_

**Quo Warranto**_ (By what right?) A judicial proceeding in which the title of
a public officer to his office or the title to or exercise of a public
franchise, such as a public utility, is tested.

_

**Ratio Decidendi_ ** The basis of a decision. The grounds upon which a case
has been decided.

[Top of Page](AdLaw.html#ADMINISTRATIVE LAW)

_

**Relator**_ An informer, the person whose complaint or information, or at
whose insistence, certain writs are issued, such as quo warranto, mandamus,
etc. See definition of the phrase _Ex rel._ The relator is the person who
started the proceedings.

_

**Remand**_ To send back. An appellate court may _remand_ a case to the court
from which it came so that further proceedings may be taken. When a prisoner
is brought before a judge on _habeas corpus_ and there is found to be legal
cause for detaining him/her, he/she is remanded to the custody of the proper
officer.

_

**Removal**_ The transfer of a case from one court to another, usually from
one trial court to another. As a case thus  "removed" from a state court of
original jurisdiction to a federal district court under circumstances provided
in the federal statutes.

_

**Res Judicata**_ An adjudicated matter. A legal issue which has been decided
by a court.

_

**Respondent**_ The party who makes an answer in a case of equity; the
defendant in such a case, or the _petitioner._ Who starts the action to which
the _respondent_ "responds."

_

**Right**_ That which a person is entitled to keep and enjoy, and to be
protected by law in its enjoyment. A right constitutes a claim when it is not
in one's possession. The word  "right" also signifies an interest when used in
regard to property. _" Right" _in this sense entitles a person to hold or
convey his property at pleasure.

_

**Standing**_ The qualifications needed to bring legal action. These
qualifications relate to the existence of a controversy in which the
_plaintiff_ himself/herself has suffered or is about to suffer an injury to or
infringement upon a legally protected _right_ which a court is competent to
redress.

_

**Stare Decisis_ ** To stand on what has been decided; to adhere to the
decision of previous cases. It is a rule, sometimes departed from, that a
point settled in a previous case becomes a precedent which should be followed
in subsequent cases decided by the same court.

_

**Stat**._ Statutes at large. A publication containing the public acts
ofCongress printed in the order of the date of each act's approval by the
President.

_

**Subpoena**_ (under penalty) A writ commanding a person to appear before a
court, or other government body having authority to issue it, under penalty of
contempt in case of disobedience. The customary means of summoning witnesses.

_

**Subpoena duces tecum**_ (under penalty bring with you) A subpoena which
commands a witness to attend and to bring with him/her designated books or
documents to be used as evidence.

_

**Sub Silentio**_ Under silence; without notice being taken.

_

**Summary Proceedine**_ A judicial action, usually a judgment or decision,
which is taken without benefit of a formal hearing. Summary decisions of the
Supreme Court are those made without the Court having heard oral argument.

_

**Tort**_ A willful or negligent injury to a plaintiffs person, property or
reputation.

[ Top of Page](AdLaw.html#ADMINISTRATIVE LAW)

_

**Traverser**_ To traverse means to deny. A traverser is, therefore, one who
denies. Thus, a person indicted for a crime traverses, or denies, the charges
set out in the indictment.

_

**Ultra Vires**_ An action beyond the legal power or authority of a
corporation, governmental agency or official.

_

**U.S.C. United States Code**_ A compilation of Congressional statutes and
their amendments which is organized into fifty subject titles.

_

**U.S.C.A. United States Code Annotated_ ** A commercially published edition
of.the _United States Code.

**Venue**_ The jurisdiction where a case is to be heard. Normally a case is
heard by the relevant court in whose district the crime or the cause of action
occurred.

_

**Waiver**_ A voluntary or intentional relinquishment of a known right. Thus,
one may waive his right to a jury trial in a federal court, or his right not
to testify when being tried for a crime.

_

**Warran_ t** A writ issued by a court, judge, or other competent authority,
addressed to an officer (usually), directing him to arrest a named person, or
to search specified premises, and affording him protection from damages if he
does so.

_

**Writ**_ A formal order from a court enjoining an individual or organization
to do or refrain from some specified action.

_

**Writ of error_ ** A request of a decision by a higher court. Acceptance of
the request is mandatory for the higher court. Only matters of law and not of
fact are subject to review under this writ. The writ or error was abolished in
1925 as a means of bringing cases to the United States Supreme Court.

[Top of Page](AdLaw.html#ADMINISTRATIVE LAW)

* * *

**

** RETURN TO:

  * [PS/LE Dept.Home Page ](../WelcGraf.html)  

  * [MSU Welcome Page](http://www.mankato.msus.edu/)

Minnesota State University,Mankato  
Morris Hall 109  
PS/LE Department  
Mankato, MN 56001  

Original Web Design by Dan Kunert

Last updated 10-14-99 by DsK



