****[Harvard Law School Library](../index.htm)**** |

[ Notable Resources](index.htm)  
---|---  
  
**[What's New](../whats_new_in_library.htm)**   |

**[Site Search](../search_the_library.htm)  **  
  
##  
_**Notable Internet Resources 2000**_

|

**January3, 10, 17, 24,  31** |

**           ** |

**May1, 8,  15,  22, 30** |

**          ** |

**September5,  11, 18, 25**  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
**February7, 14,  21** |  |

**June5, 12, 20, 26** |  |

**October2, 10,  16**  
  
**March6, 13, 20, 27** |  |

**July5, 11, 17, 24** |  |

**November6, 13, 20**  
  
**April3, 11, 17,  24** |  |

**August14,  21, 29** |  |

**December4, 11,  18**  
  
### ![blueline.jpg \(705 bytes\)](../images/blueline.jpg)

### January 3

**_Law Review Electronic Submissions  
_** (<http://www.nku.edu/~chase/libesubmission.html>): Professor Rick Bales,
at Salmon P. Chase College of Law, Northern Kentucky University, created this
useful site. Here you can find a listing of law reviews that will accept
submissions _electronically_. The listing is alphabetical and includes a link
to the e-mail of the contact person, the name of the person to whom to submit
articles, the telephone number to request an expedited review of a submission
and the date on which the law review board changes each year. A very handy
tool!

**_Online! Citation Styles  
_** (<http://www.bedfordstmartins.com/online/index.html>): Need to cite an
online source in a paper or article? Try this guide from Bedford/St. Martin's
Press. This online guide, which will give citation format for both print and
online sources, is one of the most up to date resources you can use. The
sources covered include e-mail, discussion lists, WWW sites and more.

**_Human Rights Watch World Report 2000_**  
([http://www.hrw.org/wr2k/](http://www.hrw.org/wr2k)): Released in mid-
December, this most recent edition of the Human Rights Watch annual report is
accessible at the Human Rights Watch site. Reports are listed by country,
along with a regional overview and special topics, including "Children's
Rights," "Women's Rights," and "Freedom of Expression on the Internet."

**_International Y2K Cooperation Center  
_** ([http://www.iy2kcc.org/](http://www.iy2kcc.org/\):)): This center was set
up to monitor the transition to the year 2000 by countries from across the
globe. A chart listing countries indicates how various sectors (i.e. energy,
telecommunications, etc.) handled the much-anticipated rollover to the New
Year. There are also links to each country's government official Y2K page.
Even though all seems to have transitioned smoothly, take a look to see what
measures were in place should that not have happened!

![blueline.jpg \(705 bytes\)](../images/blueline.jpg)

### January 10:  Finding Working Papers

**_Social Science Research Network  
_**(<http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/search.taf>): A really useful site for
locating working papers. Find links to law schools' working paper collections
related to law and economics as well as public policy. There are also working
paper links for accounting, economics, finance and Latin American studies. A
good first stop site when looking for a working paper on the Web.

**_Working Paper Sites  
_**(<http://www.econ.canterbury.ac.nz/wpsites.htm>): If you are looking for a
working paper on the topic of economics, try this site from the University of
Canterbury in New Zealand. You'll find links to many sites from around the
world where working papers are available for free, full text, on the Internet.

**_M.I.T. Theses and E-Theses Online_**  
(<http://theses.mit.edu/>): This collection of selected MIT master's and
doctoral theses (from 1998 to present), accessible full-text via the World
Wide Web, can be searched by author, title, subject area or using an advanced
search interface with even more options. Documents are also listed by author
and year for easy browsing. If you do not find the MIT thesis you are looking
for in the electronic collection, there is a link to BARTON, the MIT on-line
catalog, where all MIT theses can be found.

**_SSRI Working Papers  
_**(<http://www.ssc.wisc.edu/econ/archive/ssriwp.htm>): The Social Science
Research Institute at the Economics Department, University of Wisconsin -
Madison, provides access in .pdf format to SSRI working papers beginning in
1997. The SSRI provides research support to the faculty in the University's
Economics Department.

**_Economics Working Paper Archive_**
(<http://augustus.csscr.washington.edu/personal/jaechul-mosaic/wpa.html>):
Maintained by a graduate student at the University of Washington, find links
to several collections of economics working papers on the Internet.

**_Working Papers_**  
(<http://finweb.bus.utexas.edu/papers.html>): For working papers related to
the topic of finance, try this site from the University of Texas at Austin,
where there are links to finance working papers available on the World Wide
Web.

**_Politics Research Group_**  
(<http://www.ksg.harvard.edu/prg/topics.htm>): From the Kennedy School's
Politics Research Group (PRG), a collection of PRG working papers from 1995 to
present.

**_Working Paper Archive_**
(<http://www.fccouncil.com/public2/economics/Research/wparchive.htm>): The
Farm Credit Council has collected working papers it has found on the Web.
Paper topics include agriculture, banking, finance and macroeconomics, as well
as a list of papers related to the Asian financial crisis. Search this
collection by title, author, keyword or publication date.

**_Scholarly Societies Project_**  
(<http://www.lib.uwaterloo.ca/society/overview.html>): From the University of
Waterloo, this is a useful site for locating scholarly societies. Find a
listing by subject (i.e. "Law"), view meeting and conference announcements,
search the site for societies by name or abbreviation, as well as view the
archives of societies' full-text serials.

![blueline.jpg \(705 bytes\)](../images/blueline.jpg)

### January 17

**_NASDAQ Glossary  
_**(<http://www.nasdaq.com/reference/glossary.stm>): Wondering what "Best Ask"
means? What is a "12(b)1 Fee"? This alphabetic list of terms from NASDAQ will
help you decipher both terms, along with many others. Unfortunately, there is
no search option available.

**_Sociology Dictionary  
_**(<http://www.iversonsoftware.com/sociology/index.htm>): Doing some cross-
disciplinary work in sociology? Here are 130 common sociology terms, listed
alphabetically with a helpful definition. Alphabetic links for easier access,
but the site is not searchable.

**_Braintrack University Index  
_**(<http://www.braintrack.com/>): From Switzerland comes an index of
universities, polytechnics, colleges and related institutions from around the
globe! You can search the listings by keyword or browse lists broken down by
country. Links are provided to the over 5300 institutions Web pages from the
easy to navigate site.

**_Association Central.com  
_**(<http://www.associationcentral.com/>): Search for specific association or
browse associations by categories, including "Law and Government". Links are
provided to association Web sites, including the American Arbitration
Association, American Corporate Counsel Association, and many state bar
associations. With the Advanced Search option
(<http://www.associationcentral.com/search/index.cfm>) you can even search by
acronym.

![blueline.jpg \(705 bytes\)](../images/blueline.jpg)

### January 24

**_SearchMil.com_** (<http://www.searchmil.com/>): Indexing over 900,000 page
sin the military domain, this specialty search engine, you can search by
keyword to retrieve and annotated list of sites. If you know the information
you are looking for is from the .mil domain, this specialty search engine can
help you retrieve the information you are searching without as many extraneous
hits.

**_Human Rights and You: A Guide for the States of the Former Soviet Union and
Central Europe_**
([http://www.usia.gov/products/pubs/humrts/](http://www.usia.gov/products/pubs/humrts)):
All 260 pages of this publication form the United States Department of State
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) are
available in .pdf format. Although compiled for law officials in the former
Soviet Union and Central Europe, this collection f United Nations, OSCE and
Council of Europe basic human rights documents is a great resource for anyone
researching human rights in this area of the world.

![blueline.jpg \(705 bytes\)](../images/blueline.jpg)

### January 31:  Country Information

**_Human Rights Watch World Report 2000  
_**([http://www.hrw.org/wr2k/](http://www.hrw.org/wr2k)): This year's Human
Rights Watch World Report covers 66 countries. Also, find special topic
reports including Academic Freedom, Corporations and Human Rights, and Child
Soldiers.

**_Library of Congress: Country Studies  
_**(<http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/cshome.html>): Search or browse almost 100
country reports prepared by the Federal Research Division of the Library of
Congress. Find out about each country's economy, government, history, and
infrastructure.

**_Pan American Organization: Country Health Profiles_**
(<http://www.paho.org/english/country.htm>): Health related profiles for each
country in the Americas can be accessed at this site. Find out about the
literacy rate, urban population, life expectancy, infant mortality rate,
access to health care and much more.

**_United Nations Interregional Crime & Justice Research Institute_**  
(<http://www.unicri.it/>): Looking for criminology information on countries
from around the globe? Try this site. Here you can access electronic
publications (<http://www.unicri.it/html/digital_publications.htm>) from the
United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Institute (UNCRI), as well as
search several databases (a bibliographic database, World Directory of
Criminological Resources, and the UNCRI Thesaurus).

![blueline.jpg \(705 bytes\)](../images/blueline.jpg)

### February 7:  Cyber Sources

**_Berkman Center for Internet and Society  
_**(<http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/>): Harvard Law Schools' Berkman Center has
posted the full-text of various pleadings in the Microsoft case. The newest
additions, in .pdf format, are Prof. Lawrence Lessig's amicus brief and
Microsoft's surreply.

**_Social and Economic Implications of Information Technologies: A
Bibliographic Database Pilot Project  
_**(<http://srsweb.nsf.gov/it_site/index.htm>): This well organized site is
presented by the National Science Foundation's Science Resource Studies. It
includes links to data sets on the Internet, which deal with the impact of
information technology on education, government, the home, science and
employment, among others.

**_Cyberspace Law  
_**([http://www.jmls.edu/cyber/](http://www.jmls.edu/cyber)): Professor David
Sorkin, from John Marshall School of Law, along with his students, put
together this site. Here you will find information and the syllabus of Prof.
Sorkin's class, as well as an extensive bibliography related to cyberlaw,
complete with links to the Web, Lexis and Westlaw. You can also join the
CYBERSPACELAW discussion list.

**_E-conomy Project  
_**(<http://e-conomy.berkeley.edu/>): A cooperative effort from the UC
Berkeley Roundtable on the International Economy, the College of Engineering,
the Haas School of Business and the School of Information Management and
Systems, this site focuses on the impact of digital networks and e-commerce on
industrial and economic activity. Find out about the research being conducted
by the Project, as well as access full-text working papers.

**_CyberSecuritiesLaw_**  
(<http://www.cybersecuritieslaw.com/>): Looking for information related to
securities regulation and the Internet? This well organized site is the one to
try first. There is a bibliography, links to other sites, news and even a free
e-mail update service.

![blueline.jpg \(705 bytes\)](../images/blueline.jpg)

### February 14:  Pacific Rim

**_East and Southeast Asia: An Annotated Directory of Internet Resources_**
([http://newton.uor.edu/Departments&Programs/AsianStudiesDept/index.html](http://newton.uor.edu/Departments&Programs/AsianStudiesDept/index.html)):
From the University of Redlands in California, this well organized site
provides a page of links for countries in Asia, as well as pages of links
related to "hot topics" such as "East Timor: The Road to Independence".

**_National Bureau of Asian Research  
_**(<http://www.nbr.org/>): Search a database, AccessAsia
(<http://www.accessasia.org/>), of Asia specialists, access National Bureau of
Asian Research (NBR) publications or try the links to other resources. The
NBR, located in Seattle, Washington, also provides related conference
announcements, links, area studies reports and news related to Asia.

**_APEC Competition Policy & Law Database  
_**(<http://www.apeccp.org.tw/>): Search the APEC's (the Asia Pacific Economic
Cooperation) Competition Policy & Law Database and browse information about
member's economies. Judicial cases, administrative procedures, competition
policies and laws as well as many other resources are all available at this
site.

**_Asian Human Rights Commission  
_**(<http://www.ahrchk.net/index.html>): Located in Hong Kong, this non-
governmental organization aims to raise awareness of human rights in the Asian
region. Information about human rights issues in specific countries including
East Timor and Sri Lanka, among others, is available. Also, find publications
by the Commission and reports on human rights issues from across Asia.

**_Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping  
_**([http://www.peopledaily.com.cn/english/dengxp/](http://www.peopledaily.com.cn/english/dengxp)):
Find the full-text in English of selected works by Deng Xiaoping, from 1938
until 1992. Documents include speeches, reports, directives, correspondence,
and more.

**_Chan Robles Virtual Law Library_**  
(<http://www.chanrobles.com/index1.htm>): For information on the Philippines,
try this site from the law firm of Chan Robles. The Virtual Law Library
includes links to primary Philippine legal resources, the full-text of the
Constitution, along with many other related resources. If you are looking at
Philippine law, try this site.

![blueline.jpg \(705 bytes\)](../images/blueline.jpg)

### February 21:  Library Catalogs and Terminology

**_Gabriel: Gateway to Europe's National Libraries  
_**(<http://portico.bl.uk/gabriel/en/services.html>): Link to and search the
online catalogs of libraries from across Europe. Also, there are links to
national bibliographies, national union catalogs, Web and gopher servers, and
library publications.

**_National Library Catalogs Worldwide  
_**([http://www.library.uq.edu.au/ssah/jeast//](http://www.library.uq.edu.au/ssah/jeast)):
The University of Queensland in Australia brings this collection of links to
national library catalogs from across the globe.

**_Catalogues de la BnF  
_**([http://www.bnf.fr/web-bnf/catalog/](http://www.bnf.fr/web-bnf/catalog)):
Search the holdings of France's national library, which include not only
current books and periodicals, but also historical texts and images. Available
only in French.

**_ODLIS: Online Dictionary of Library and Information Science_**
(<http://www.wcsu.ctstateu.edu/library/odlis.html>): Joan M. Reitz, an
Assistant Professor at Western Connecticut State University, has assembled
this alphabetic list of library terms. Not only will you find out what the
_Anglo-American Cataloging Rules_ and an _abstract_ are, you can also find out
about computer related terminology like _CGI_ and _cache_.

**_LibraryLand: Index to Resources for Librarians_**  
(<http://www.librarylandindex.org/>): At this up to date site, find links to
information for librarians as well as search the Internet for library related
information. Topics include digital imaging initiatives, law libraries, and
Web management.

![blueline.jpg \(705 bytes\)](../images/blueline.jpg)

### March 6:  Canada

**_Canadian Links  
_**(<http://www.canadian-links.com/>): This collection of over 20,000 links to
information sources on the Internet related to Canada is fully searchable. Or,
you can browse the links broken down by topic or geographic area.

**_Canadian Information by Subject: Law  
_**([http://www.nlc-bnc.ca/caninfo/ep034.htm#34](http://www.nlc-
bnc.ca/caninfo/ep034.htm)): The National Library of Canada has collected links
to many sources of information related to Canada, including a set of links to
legal resources. This well organized collection of links includes
international law, municipal law, civil rights, natural resource law and civil
procedure resources, just to name a few.

**_LexUM_**  
(<http://www.lexum.umontreal.ca/index_en.html>): Presented by the University
of Montreal's Faculty of Law, available in English or French, this site
includes links to resources for the law of Canada, Quebec as well as
international law. There are several resources that are only available in
French, as indicated by an asterisk (*).

**_British Columbia Law Institute_**  
(<http://www.bcli.org>): An independent research institution, the Institute
studies issues related to legal reform in Canada, as well as in other Anglo-
American countries worldwide. There are full-text publications such as working
papers accessible at the site. Also, you will find a fully searchable database
of reports on law reform in the U.S., Canada, U.K., Australia, New Zealand,
South Africa, and Papua New Guinea.

![blueline.jpg \(705 bytes\)](../images/blueline.jpg)

### March 13:  Time to Think About Taxes

**_TaxIssue.com  
_**(<http://www.TaxIssue.com/>): Loaded with free tax related information,
this site is easy to navigate. The "Resources" section includes tax
statistics, federal forms, state forms, and legislation. "Links" to federal
and state tax related sites, the IRS, associations as well as international
information are likewise available. Or, you can search the tax code or tax
cases. There is also a "Refund Estimator"!

**_Tax Forms and Research on the Web_**
(<http://www.law.harvard.edu/library/research_guides/tax_forms.htm>): From the
Harvard Law School Library, use this helpful research guide to find federal
and state tax forms. The guide is also useful for those researching tax law,
with access to tax legislation, regulation and cases. Additionally, call
numbers for select tax related resources available in hard copy at the Harvard
Law School Library are provided.

**_Sister States  
_**([http://www.sisterstates.com/](http://www.sisterstates.co/)): Aptly billed
as "Your One Stop Source for All State Tax Sites", find links to 2000 tax
information and forms for all 50 states.

**_DOJ Criminal Tax Manual  
_**(<http://www.usdoj.gov/tax/readingroom/foia/tax.htm>): The full-text of the
current Department of Justice _Criminal Tax Manual_ is available in either
HTML or PDF format. Also available are the _Judgment Collection Manual_ and
_Settlement Reference Manual_.

**_The Department of the Treasury - Tax Policy Documents  
_**([http://www.ustreas.gov/taxpolicy/](http://www.ustreas.gov/taxpolicy)):
From the Office of Tax Policy at the United States Department of the Treasury,
this site provides access to documents related to tax policy
(<http://www.ustreas.gov/taxpolicy/documents.html>) including Congressional
testimony, tax treaty documents, reports on various studies, administrative
guidance and regulations.

![blueline.jpg \(705 bytes\)](../images/blueline.jpg)

### March 20:  Law of Indigenous People

**_Native American Legal Resources  
_**(<http://www.law.ou.edu/indian/index.html>): Home of the Native American
Constitution and Law Digitization Project (<http://thorpe.ou.edu/>), which
provides native American Constitutions and Codes full-text, be sure to look at
this site. Links to tribal home pages, legal and historical resources related
to Native Americans add to this site's usefulness.

**_Bureau of Indian Affairs  
_**([http://www.doi.gov/bureau-indian-affairs.html](http://www.doi.gov/bureau-
indian-affairs.htm)): Find information about the American Indian Trust, Bureau
of Indian Affairs (BIA) law enforcement activities, legislative affair
updates, gaming compacts, statistics, select BIA reports - to list some of the
many resources available at this U.S. government site.

**_LII: Law About Indian Peoples  
_**(<http://www.law.cornell.edu/topics/indian.html>): A great source for law
related to indigenous people from Cornell's Legal Information Institute. Find
links to related sections of the U.S. Constitution, federal statutes,
regulations and decisions, along with state and international materials.

**_NativeWeb  
_**([http://www.nativeweb.org/](http://www.nativeweb.or/)): Billed as
"Resources for Indigenous Cultures around the World", find over 3000 links to
internet resources related to indigenous people worldwide, organized in
categories, such as "Law & Legal Issues" and "History", under the "Start Here"
on the menu. There is also the "Native Law News Digest", where current news
stories related to indigenous peoples are digested, and a link is provided to
the full text of the story. The entire site is searchable.

**_Native Law Centre of Canada  
_**([http://www.usask.ca/nativelaw/](http://www.usask.ca/nativelaw)): From the
University of Saskatchewan's Native Law Centre of Canada, this site provides a
searchable index of Canadian native law cases (1763-1978), about 25% are
available full-text, with plans to continue to add to this percentage. There
is also a listing of the Centre's publications, select articles from the
Centre's newsletter, _Justice as Healing_ , as well as information about the
Centre and its various programs.

**_National Native Title Tribunal_**  
(<http://www.nntt.gov.au/nntt/home.nsf/area/homepage>): In 1992, the High
court of Australia recognized native title. The National Native Title Tribunal
(NNTT), which is not a court and renders no decisions, "facilitates the making
of agreements" between native peoples, the government and private interests.
The NNTT's site includes the Annual Reports (1995 to 1999), information on the
registration procedure, regulations concerning indigenous land use agreements
(ILUAs), along with other information related to native title in Australia.

![blueline.jpg \(705 bytes\)](../images/blueline.jpg)

### March 27:  United Kingdom

**_British and Irish Legal Information Institute (BAILII)  
_**([http://www.bailii.org/](http://www.bailii.or/)): Launched just this
month, this site is the first on the Web to offer free access to case law and
legislation from the United Kingdom, as well as Ireland. Fourteen databases
are already available, with more to be added. The Australasian Legal
Information Institute
([http://www.austlii.edu.au)](http://www.austlii.edu.au\)/) developed BAILII,
where you can find British legal materials - very well organized and fully
searchable.

**_Hansards: House of Commons_**
(<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm/cmhansrd.htm>) ** _and House of
Lords Debates_** (<http://www.parliament.the-stationery-
office.co.uk/pa/ld/ldhansrd.htm>): The House of Lords debates from June of
1996 and the House of Commons debates all the way back to 1988 are now
available full-text at these sites. The House of Commons debates are also
fully searchable, the House of Lords debates can be searched under certain
categories, i.e. bills, statements, questions. Both pages are updated daily.

**_Environmental Agency of England and Wales  
_**(<http://www.environment-agency.gov.uk/>): Find guidances, directives,
policies as well as research and full-text documents related to environmental
issues in England, Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales.

**_Tax Links -- AccountingWEB  
_**([http://www.accountingweb.co.uk/tax/](http://www.accountingweb.co.uk/tax)):
Looking for British tax information? Try this site aimed at accountants in the
United Kingdom. One of the most useful features is large collection of links
to British tax information on the Internet
([http://www.accountingweb.co.uk/cgi-
bin/item.cgi?id=13447&d=182](http://www.accountingweb.co.uk/cgi-
bin/item.cgi?id=13447&d=182)).

**_The Times  
_**(<http://www.the-times.co.uk/>): Keep up to date on British news, and
search the archives all the way back to 1996 (<http://www.the-
times.co.uk/news/pages/resources/library1.n.html>)

**_BBC  
_**(<http://news.bbc.co.uk/>): A great source for news from the United Kingdom
as well as across the world, this site is constantly updated. You can also
search the archives back to the site launch date in 1997.

![blueline.jpg \(705 bytes\)](../images/blueline.jpg)

### April 3:  Asia

**_China WTO Accession Deal  
_**(<http://www.fas.usda.gov/itp/china/accession.html>): The United States
Department of Agriculture provides full-text fact sheets in portable document
format related to the effect of China's accession to the World Trade
Organization on American agriculture. Fact sheets are available for different
types of agricultural products as well as for each state. Other documents
related to China's cooperative agricultural agreement are also available,
along with links to other federal government sites dealing with Chinese-
American trade.

**_Asia Recovery Information Center (ARIC)  
_**(<http://aric.adb.org/>): In response to the financial crisis in Indonesia,
the Republic of Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines, and Thailand, the ARIC was
established by a grant from the Australian Agency for International
Development in March of 1999. One of the full-text documents available at this
site is the ARIC 2000 Annual Report on the status of the recovery of these
countries. Also, there are news stories and articles. Special sections of the
site are devoted to links to other sites, the social dimensions of the crisis,
international assistance as well as several other related topics.

**_Asian-Pacific Law & Policy Journal (APLPJ)  
_**([http://www.hawaii.edu/aplpj/](http://www.hawaii.edu/aplp)): Hosted by the
University of Hawaii Richardson School of Law, this free online journal is
devoted to legal, policy and socio-economic issues in East Asia and Polynesia.
The first issue was published in February 2000 and is a symposium issue on
legal education in Japan.

**_South Asia Terrorism Portal  
_**([http://www.icm-satp.com/](http://www.icm-satp.co/)): Launched on March
11, 2000 by the Institute for Conflict Management (ICM), this portal provides
information, analysis and data on terrorism and low-intensity warfare in South
Asia. Countries covered include Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Pakistan and Nepal.
Documents available include select laws, agreements and constitutional
provisions from each country related to terrorism. Get up to date news on
terrorism in South Asia with the "Terrorism Update" section of this site.

![blueline.jpg \(705 bytes\)](../images/blueline.jpg)

### April 11:  Non-Law Research Sites

**_Social Science Hub  
_**(<http://www.sshub.com>): Looking for political science, sociology, or
other social science related information on the Internet? Give this site a
try. You will find a collection of Web site organized by topic, links to
journals, other publications, online databases as well as to a collection of
social science resources organized by country.

**_ThisNation.com  
_**(<http://www.thisnation.com/>): Billed as "The Most Comprehensive Guide to
American Government & Politics on the Net", find a glossary of political
terms, an online textbook, news and political commentary all at this useful
site. The Library (<http://www.thisnation.com/library/index.html>) section
includes select executive orders, U.S. Supreme Court decisions, inaugural
addresses, foreign policy statements, war messages, among other documents
full-text.

**_Psychology Resources  
_**(<http://www.psychologyresources.net/site/resources.htm>): Try this site
for psychology resources on the Internet. Links to online journals, psychology
conference information from around the world and tips for conducting
psychology research on the Internet are all clearly presented at this site
created by a researcher at Regis University in Colorado. One of the most
useful features is a collection of well-annotated links to psychology sites on
the Internet (<http://www.psychologyresources.net/site/links.htm>) organized
by topic, i.e. post-traumatic stress, behavioral psychology, etc.

**_Opinion Pages  
_**(<http://www.opinion-pages.org/>): Access recent opinion and editorial
pieces from almost 600 online English language newspaper from across the
globe. You can search the entire collection, view links to papers by
geographic region or search subject focused databases, such as technology,
business and finance or even sports.

**_MagPortal.com_**  
(<http://www.magportal.com/>): Find links to, or search, online magazine
articles organized by subject, i.e., Internet, health, business, etc. Or,
search the entire collection of articles. The articles retrieved can then be
viewed full-text, marked and stored, or you can find similar articles by
clicking on an icon next to the title.

![blueline.jpg \(705 bytes\)](../images/blueline.jpg)

### April 17:  Patent, Trademark, and Copyright

**_PatentLawLinks.com  
_**([http://www.patentlawlinks.com/](http://www.patentlawlinks.co/)):  
Case law, statutes, regulations, Patent and Trademark Office forms, journals,
search engines and more, all focused on intellectual property law are linked
form this useful site.

**_Selected Patent, Trademark, and Copyright Information on the Web_**
(<http://www.libraries.wvu.edu/patentweb.htm>): Natalie Rutledge, a librarian
at the Western Virginia University Library, has collected and annotated this
list of useful patent, trademark and copyright sites.

**_Copyright Resources Online  
_**([http://www.library.yale.edu/%7Eokerson/copyproj.html](http://www.library.yale.edu/~okerson/copyproj.html)):
Another collection of links, these form the Yale University Library. Find
links, both an annotated and an unannotated listing, to university and non-
university sites devoted to the topic of copyright.

**_Trademark Electronic Search System  
_**([http://tess.uspto.gov/](http://tess.uspto.go/)): This pilot database will
eventually replace the current US Trademark Search Database. Both databases
will remain operational until further notice. TESS, as it is called, contains
in excess of 2.6 million pending, registered and dead records. You can search
via a "Structured Form Search", a "Free Form Search", or "Browse Dictionary".

**_European Patent Office_** ([http://www.european-patent-
office.org/](http://www.european-patent-office.or/)): Find Official Journal
documents, Board of Appeals rules, contact information for patent office
across Europe with links to available Web sites, full-text of the European
Patent Convention and ancillary regulations, a guide for EPO applicants, and
much more at this site.

**_IP Australia_** ([
http://www.ipaustralia.gov.au/index.html](http://www.ipaustralia.gov.au/index.html)):
The federal government of Australia presents this site where you can search
the Australian patent database or apply for a patent online!

**_Institut National de la Propriete Industrielle_** (<http://www.inpi.fr/>):
This French government site devoted to intellectual property, completely in
French, provides a search of patent databases (the previous two years of
records for free and others by subscription) along with valuable additional
information about patent law in France.

![blueline.jpg \(705 bytes\)](../images/blueline.jpg)

### April 24:  New HLS Databases

**_CCH Tax Research Network_** ([
http://tax.cch.com/ipnetwork](http://tax.cch.com/ipnetwork)):  
Check out the research guide
([http://www.law.harvard.edu/library/research_guides/cch_research_network.htm](../research_guides/cch_research_network.htm))
from the HLS Library which will help you make the most of the new HLS
subscription to this online tax resource.

### United States Federal Government

**_Supreme Court of the United States  
_**(<http://www.supremecourtus.gov/>): This week, the Supreme Court introduced
its Web site. You can find case law, a listing of all justices for the entire
history of the court, orders, a court calendar, bar admission information,
court rules plus more. Many documents are in Portable Document Format (.pdf).

**_Washington File  
_**(<http://usinfo.state.gov/products/washfile.htm>): The United States
Department of State International Information Programs presents this site
which contains official texts, policy statements and interpretive materials,
features and byline articles produced by this Program. You can access
information from the past two weeks by region or topic, quick link to
information from the past 48 hours, or you can search a database of materials
from the past several years.

**_Federal Labor Relations Authority  
_**([http://www.flra.gov/](http://www.flra.go/)): Find information about this
independent agency's local offices, access decisions, policies, guidances,
FLRA News and FLRA Bulletin full-text, and more at the FLRA Web site.

  _ **![blueline.jpg \(711 bytes\)](../ref/ils_ref/blueline.jpg)**_

### May 1: Lexis Update

**_CIS Historical Index_** : For the first time, you can access the CIS
Historical Index, covering 1789 through 1969, on Lexis. Now locating
historical congressional documents is easier than ever! You can find this new
source in the _LEGIS, GENFED_ or _CODES_ Libraries, as the _CISHST_ File, or
in the Source Selection Hierarchy: _/Legislation & Politics/U.S.
Congress/Legislative Histories_.

**Notable Internet Resources:   Some Notable Non-U.S. Sites**

_**Federal Court of Canada  
**_(<http://www.fja.gc.ca/en/cf/index.html>): Canadian Federal Court decisions
beginning in 1990 are available full-text at this site. You can also access
the Court Rules, subscribe to an e-mail list to keep up to date on new Court
decisions, and learn about the Court's Internet Project and its Reports
Advisory Committee.

**_Australian Institute of Criminology  
_**(<http://www.aic.gov.au/index.html>): For information about Australian
crime and criminal justice, try this site. Full-text publications and reports,
links to other Internet resources, statistics, information on Australian
policing and other several other topics are all accessible at this well
organized and fully searchable site.

_**Mbendi  
**_(<http://mbendi.co.za/>): Billed as "Africa's Leading Business Website",
this site provides access to information about African companies,
organizations, stock markets, industry sectors, news, export and import
procedures, and much more. You can also find background information about
African countries, such as population, government structure, and leading
industries.

_**Caribbean Amerindian Centrelink  
**_(<http://members.nbci.com/cariblink/index.html>): At this helpful site for
locating information about Caribbean Amerindians, find annotated links to
resources related to Caribbean Amerindian communities, debates, documents,
dissertations, archeology, arts and much more.

**_Gazetteer for Scotland  
_**([http://www.geo.ed.ac.uk/scotgaz/](http://www.geo.ed.ac.uk/scotgaz)): This
online gazetteer, developed by the Department of Geography at the University
of Edinburgh with the Royal Scottish Geographic Society, provides information
about Scottish towns, villages and glens, including maps, geography, and more.
You can also search the statistics
(<http://www.geo.ed.ac.uk/scotgaz/Statistics.html>).

_**![blueline.jpg \(711 bytes\)](../ref/ils_ref/blueline.jpg)**_

### May 8:  E-commerce Sites

**_Dot Com Statistics  
_**([http://www.nsol.com/statistics/](http://www.nsol.com/statistics)):
Network Solutions brings you United States, international and business domain
statistics from 1998 through January 2000.

**_E-Commerce Policy  
_**(<http://www.ecommerce.gov/>): This United States government site is
completely devoted to e-commerce. Find "Important U.S. Documents" related to
e-commerce, links to U.S. government and international sites, the White
House's "Framework for Global Electronic Commerce," U.S. government
announcements and much more.

**_Northern Light Special Edition: Electronic Commerce_**
([http://special.northernlight.com/ecommerce/index.html
](http://special.northernlight.com/ecommerce/index.html)): Internet search
engine Northern Light has collected resources from across the Internet related
to e-commerce and presents them in a well organized, user friendly manner.
This site is a good place to start looking for e-commerce related information
on the Web.

**_Federal Electronic Commerce Program  
_**(<http://ec.fed.gov/>): This site is divided into sections on e-commerce
topics such as "Security", "Electronic Funds Transfers", "Small Business Help
Corner", and many more. There are links to other federal electronic commerce
sites, a library of electronic commerce documents available in full-text, and
news about current electronic commerce topics. Use this site as a gateway to
United States government information on electronic commerce.

_**![blueline.jpg \(711 bytes\)](../ref/ils_ref/blueline.jpg)**_

### **May 15: Company Research**

**_Annual Report Gallery  
_**([http://www.reportgallery.com/](http://www.reportgallery.co/)): Browse or
search over 2200 United States company reports, including most fortune 500
companies, at this well organized and FREE site. You can search by company
name or ticker symbol, see international company reports, or access a set of
links to financial resources across the Web!

**_Carlson Online  
_**([http://www.carlsononline.com/](http://www.carlsononline.co/)): For
Canadian public company information, try this site. You can search by symbol
or company name to find basic information including press releases, links to
Web sites, stock quotes, public filings and more, all for free. For a fee,
even more information is available.

**_How to Research Companies on the Internet_**
(<http://www.internetlawyer.com/facts/company.html>): From _The Internet
Lawyer_ , this guide helps you find information on public and private
companies, company reports, SEC filings, and more. A very useful place to
start your company research on the Internet.

  **Westlaw and Lexis Update: Summer Access **

_Lexis_ : Find out about summer access to Lexis
(<http://lawschool.lexis.com/offers/summer/index.html>) for graduating
students, unpaid externs
(<http://lawschool.lexis.com/offers/summer/access.htm>), and returning
students.

**_Westlaw_** : Westlaw is offering free access (up to two hours per month)
all summer to returning students! Find out more about this and other Westlaw
summer access offers
([http://lawschool.westlaw.com/](http://lawschool.westlaw.com/\))).

_**![blueline.jpg \(711 bytes\)](../ref/ils_ref/blueline.jpg)**_

### **May 22: Investment Resources**

**_Stockmaster  
_**(<http://www.stockmaster.com/>): Looking for current information about
stocks? This site is a helpful resource. Find out which stocks were "Big
Gainers", which "Big Losers", which the "Most Active", and which were the "Top
Stocks". There is also a graph of recent market activity and related
headlines.

**_InvestorWords  
_**(<http://www.investorwords.com/>): This financial glossary includes over
5000 terms. You can browse an alphabetic list of terms or search the glossary.
Although the definitions are not lengthy, there are over 15000 links between
related terms.

**_FundAlarm  
_**(<http://www.fundalarm.com/>): Updated on the first of each month, this
site aims to assist investors deciding whether to sell or hold on to mutual
funds. Find data tables, commentary and information about fund manager
changes. Search or browse this database of over 3400 funds. Also, register for
the free e-mail update service to keep up to date about your funds.

**_InvestMove.com  
_**(<http://www.investmove.com/>): Full of "top 10" lists of sources for
investment information, use this site intended for investors and analysts as a
jump-off point when conducting financial research. Top 10 lists include
financial portals, market data sites, business newspaper and stock pick sites.

**_Salary.com_**  
(<http://www.salary.com/>): This site lets you check comparable salaries for
the same position in different geographic areas. Also, want to know what the
going rate is for a professional before you post a job or make an offer? This
site is a great tool for you! If you are looking for a job, there is also a
"negotiation clinic" to help you make the most of your opportunities!

_**![blueline.jpg \(711 bytes\)](../ref/ils_ref/blueline.jpg)**_

###  **May 30: Governments: U.S., U.K.& Ireland**

**_Lawlinks  
_**([http://library.ukc.ac.uk/library/lawlinks/](http://library.ukc.ac.uk/library/lawlinks)):  
Sarah Carter, Law Librarian at the Templeton Library, University of Kent,
Canterbury, has collected and organized links to legal resources from around
the world. The site is particularly useful for finding United Kingdom
government agency Web sites, official publications, and also offers a great
list of British legal abbreviations, including law reporters and journals.

**_British and Irish Legal Information Institute (BAILII)  
_**(<http://www.bailii.org/>): This site is the first on the Web to offer free
access to case law and legislation from the United Kingdom, as well as
Ireland. Fourteen databases are already available, with more to be added. The
Australasian Legal Information Institute
([http://www.austlii.edu.au](http://www.austlii.edu.au/)) developed BAILII,
where you can find British legal materials - very well organized and fully
searchable.

**_Index Ireland_** (<http://www.indexireland.com/>): With a look and feel
similar to Yahoo, this site is a useful resource for general, as well as
government information about Ireland. There are links to sites from the Irish
government Web sites, political parties, current issues, or you can search the
entire site.

**_The Great American Web Site_** (<http://www.uncle-sam.com/>): This non-
government Web site presents a gateway to United States Government resources
on the Web. Broken down by branch (Executive, Legislative, Judicial, Executive
and Independent Agencies), this site is easy to navigate and well organized,
though not comprehensive.

**_GovSpot  
_**(<http://www.govspot.com/>): Another non-government sponsored site, this
portal is another useful tool for locating U.S. government information on the
Internet. Much larger collection of links than "The Great American Web Site,"
above. The links here also include state and local government resources.

![blueline.jpg \(711 bytes\)](../ref/ils_ref/blueline.jpg)

### **June 5: Stay Connected This Summer! E-mail Access**

**_Openmail web  
_**(<https://hulaw5.law.harvard.edu:8087/OM/omhtml.cgi>): You can directly
access your HLS Openmail account via this Web interface. So, no matter where
you are, all you need is an Internet connection to receive and send e-mail.

**_Mailstart  
_**(<http://mailstart.com/>): Access any POP e-mail account (including HLS
accounts) via the Internet. Simply type in your e-mail address (i.e.,
_smith@law.harvard.edu_ ) and your password, and you have instant access to
your e-mail account.

**_Mail2Web  
_**(<http://mail2web.com/>): No excuse for not keeping up with your e-mail
correspondence! Here is yet another site where you can access any POP e-mail
account simply by entering your e-mail user name and password!  
  
![blueline.jpg \(711 bytes\)](../ref/ils_ref/blueline.jpg)

### **June 12: Stay Connected This Summer! Virtual Hard Drives**

**_Webbox  
_**(<http://www.webbox.com/>): With a free Webbox, you can access up to five
e-mail accounts at the same time, store up to 20 MB, and access the Webbox
Scheduler to keep track of appointments. Store your files in your Webbox and
access them from any Web-connected terminal! No need to carry floppy disks
around anymore!

**_Virtual Harddrives  
_**(<http://superstone.freeservers.com/storage/vdrive.htm>): As this Web page
states, "Forget Floppys!" This list of free Internet virtual hard drives
includes information on the amount of storage that each service offers. Take a
look and select your favorite virtual hard drive to use while you are away
from home and office this summer!

**_X:drive  
_**(<http://www.xdrive.com/>): Another virtual storage site, with a very
useful feature. Download software from the site and you can access your X:
drive files from your desktop just like files on your C drive! X: drive also
offers wireless access (<http://www.xdrive.com/company/wireless.html>) to your
files.

**_FreeDrive  
_**(<http://www.freedrive.com/>): Here is yet another free file storage site -
with up to 50 MB of storage for each account!

 ![blueline.jpg \(711 bytes\)](../ref/ils_ref/blueline.jpg)

### June 20: Free Electronic Texts

**_Project Gutenberg  
_([http://promo.net/pg/](http://promo.net/pg))**:This collection includes
reference works as well as fiction and non-fiction titles. A great site with
many e-texts, which you can browse or search by title and author.

**_Electronic Text Center  
_(<http://etext.lib.virginia.edu/uvaonline.html>)**: You will find reference
materials (<http://www.lib.virginia.edu/research_home.html>) as well many
foreign language e-texts. Some of the languages represented include French,
Latin, German, Chinese, Greek, Hebrew and Spanish.

**_Alex Catalogue of Electronic Texts  
_([http://sunsite.berkeley.edu/alex/](http://sunsite.berkeley.edu/alex))**:
From the University of California at Berkley, here is yet another site with
many e-texts. Search the catalogue of online texts or browse by title and
author. Links to other e-text collections are also provided.

**_Bartleby.com  
_ (<http://bartleby.com/>)**: Choose reference, fiction and non-fiction works
as well as poems at this easy to navigate and well organized site.

**_IPL Online Text Collection_  
([http://www.ipl.org/reading/books/](http://www.ipl.org/reading/books))**:
Search, or browse this collection of over 12000 e-texts. A unique feature of
this site is the ability to browse titles by Dewey Decimal Classification,
just like scanning a "bricks and mortar" library shelf!

**_The Avalon Project  
_([www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/avalon.htm](http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/avalon.htm))**:
These "Documents in Law, History and Diplomacy" from Yale, include many
treaties, state historical documents and other valuable historical texts.

![blueline.jpg \(711 bytes\)](../ref/ils_ref/blueline.jpg)

###  **June 26: Full-text Law Reviews on the Web**

**_ALSO! U.S. Law Sources Online  
_**(<http://www.lawsource.com/also/usa.cgi?usj>): This site lists United
States law reviews and periodicals on the Internet alphabetically by title.

