![](../../images/logo4cx.gif)  

# **_Graduate Fall 2002  
500 Level Courses_**



| **

COURSE    ** | **

PROFESSOR ** | **

DAY/TIME ** | **

ROOM ** | **

TITLE/DESCRIPTION **  
---|---|---|---|---  
HIS 500/CEG 523 | Frohman | Thursday 6:00-9:00  | SBS N318  |

**_HISTORIOGRAPHY_**  

Wednesday 6:00-9:00 (SBS N318)

Introduction to historiography through reading and writing about
interpretations of history, historical methods, and major historians. Term
paper on historian of choice.

Required for all M.A. and M.A.T. students.

  
  

  
  
  
* * *  
  
CEG 535  | Monsalve | Monday 6:00-9:00  |  SBS N318  |

FIELD SEMINAR  

**_INTRODUCTION TO COLONIAL LATIN AMERICA_** \

This course will focus on one of the key elements of Latin American Colonial
society: The city. Cities were not only the center of the colonial
bureaucracy, but also the place of intense social interaction among the
different ethnic groups that made up colonial societies in Latin America. We
will survey the most important topics in the cultural and social history of
Colonial cities from the 16th century to the 18th century. For example, we
will explore themes such as colonial elites, church organizations, guilds,
confraternities and city planning. The requirements are three ten-page papers
based on the readings.

**FOR MAT AND MALS STUDENTS.**  
  
* * *  
  
CEG 532

|

Creagh |

Tuesday 6:00-9:00

|

SBS N303 |

**_FIELD SEMINAR_**

_**U.S. TO CIVIL WAR**_  

The graduate level survey course in U.S. history is designed especially for
full-time secondary school teachers who are pursuing their M.A.T. degrees.
Students are encouraged through weekly readings and occasional projects to
enhance their own comprehension of scholarly arguments as well as develop
creative methods for engaging secondary-level students in challenging
historical analysis. The goals of this course are:

1) Enhance the student's ability to scrutinize and criticize an historian's
arguments.  
2) Enhance the student's ability to compare scholarly historical analyses
across different periods, place, and populations.  
3) Develop methods to engage high school students in the critical analysis of
scholarly work that takes them beyond the textbook narrative.  
4) Develop methods to help high school students prepare for the intellectual
challenges of college-level history courses.

Course requirements: Students are required to purchase a course reading
packet. Students are expected to read the equivalent of two scholarly articles
per week (provided in the packet) and come to class prepared to analyze the
articles and discuss teaching strategies related to that week's topic.
Students are also expected to complete two projects outside of class that
demonstrate an ability to analyze historians' arguments and adapt the use of
scholarly works to the secondary level classroom. In addition, students are
expected to present one of their projects to the class in which they adapt the
project to serve as a teaching demonstration.

FOR MAT AND MALS STUDENTS  
  
* * *  
  
HIS 521  

|

Rilling |

Wednesday  
4:30-7:30

|

SBS S309 |

**_FIELD SEMINAR:  
US HISTORY Through THE CIVIL WAR:_**

This first half of the field survey in American history examines major
historical problems and interpretations from the era of colonial contact
through the Civil War. Common reading averages 1-2 books per week. Students
will be asked to prepare 3-4 oral and written reports on reading. Class
participation is critical.



**

FOR MA AND PhD STUDENTS ONLY.

**  
  
* * *  
  
HIS 524/ 525 |

Lebovics & Sellers |

Monday  
4:30-7:30

|

SBS N303 |

**_CORE SEMINAR:  
HISTORY, THEORY, AND PRACTICE: _**

This year-long course is your introduction to graduate study in history in
general, and Stony Brook's PhD Program in History in particular. It has three
goals: 1) to provide an overview of the three thematic areas emphasized by our
graduate program (women, gender, sexuality, and reproduction; nation state and
civil society; and empire, modernity, and globalization); 2: to explore
theoretical concepts that inform historical writing; and  
3) to introduce you to the techniques and resources of historical research.
Requirements include active participation in class discussion of assigned
readings, four short writing exercises, and a final research paper.  



** FOR MA AND PhD HISTORY STUDENTS ONLY**.  
  
* * *  
  
HIS 532

|

Klubock  |

Thursday  
4:30-7:30

|

SBS N303

|

**_THEME SEMINAR  
Sexuality GENDER AND The Production of Modernity: _**

**

FOR PhD AND MA STUDENTS.

**  
  
* * *  
  
HIS 532

  

|

Marker |

Friday 1:00-4:00

|

SBS N318 |

THEME SEMINAR - Theme Seminars on Gender, Sexuality and Reproduction  
_**GENDER, RELIGION AND MODERNITY**_  

This theme seminar will review recent writings dealing with religion and
constructions of the feminine and masculine in European (including Russian),
US, Latin American, Middle Eastern, and Asian history. The chronological range
will be fairly broad, including some readings from late medieval and early
modern Europe (e.g. Natalie Davis' Women on the Margins, and Margaret
Ziolkowski's The Tale of Boiarynia Morozova) before proceeding to the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries. We shall discuss a variety of themes: the
religious discourses of gender, the ways in which secular writings have
accessed religious tradition and imagery (both written and visual) to
understand masculine and feminine/men and women; and in particular the place
of religious imagery in gendered understandings of power and resistance.
Readings will come from a variety of secondary literature (both books and
articles) as well as some primary materials, mostly autobiographies and
hagiographic vitae. Students will write a couple of short papers on the
readings as well as a longer historiographic essay discussing the scholarship
in their field of concentration on one of the course's themes).

**

FOR MA AND PhD STUDENTS ONLY.

**  
  
* * *  
  
HIS 552

|

Tomes |

Tuesda 4:30-7:30

|

SBS S309 |

THEME SEMINAR - Theme Seminars on Nation, State, and Civil Society  
_**MASS MEDIA and JOURNALISM in INTERNATIONAL PERSPECTIVE**_ _ **  
**_****

This course will introduce students to recent work on mass media and
journalism from the late 19th through mid-20th centuries, with particular
emphasis on the introduction of radio. We will look very broadly at the ways
new media forms influenced politics and culture in the United States in
comparison to other countries. Topics to be explored include: changing notions
of free speech, mass media as a democratizing force, mass media and political
organizing, and the boundary between information and advertising. We will read
excerpts from influential media theorists from outside history (Marshall
McLuhan, John B. Thompson, Robert McChesney), and portions of works such as
Michele Himes, ed., Radio Readers: Essays in the Cultural History of Radio,
Richard Butsch, the Making of American Audiences: From Stage to TV, and Kate
Lacey, Feminine Frequencies: Gender, German radio, and the public sphere,
1923-1945. Students will be asked to prepare a review essay (7-10 typed,
double spaced pages) and an annotated bibliography of books and articles on a
subject of their choice. Although readings on U.S. history will predominate,
the course will offer other, varied perspectives on media history as well.
Students with diverse geographic and disciplinary interests are encouraged to
take this course and to develop reading units compatible with their own
interest.

**__**

**

FOR MA AND PHD HISTORY STUDENTS ONLY.

**  
  
* * *  
  
HIS 557  
Cross-listed With SOC 591

|

Roxborough |

Tuesday  
7:00-10:00

|

SBS N403

|

**_THEME SEMINAR: Nation, State, and Civil Society  
_** REVOLUTIONS & REVOLUTIONARY MOVEMENTS  

Revolutions are dramatic events that - at least in some ways - shatter the
existing fabric of social order. Besides being interesting in themselves, they
enable us to look at large issues of social change and stability,
legitimation, ideology, inequality, authority, and the role of force in
politics.

Revolutions are also notoriously difficult to define. Some writers only look
at "big," "successful" revolutions. Others think that we should also look at
"small" revolutions, "failed" revolutions, and also-rans. I think this latter
group is right and, as a consequence, I have organized the course to look at
revolutionary movements and failed revolutions as well as the more standard
big revolutions. This means that we will look at a variety of social
movements, some of which have been labeled guerrilla wars, civil wars, and
insurgencies. This broader scope will better help us address questions such
as: "what sorts of social movements are involved in revolutionary activity?";
"when does a social movement find that it is revolutionary?"; "what makes for
success and failure?"; "do revolutions really change society?" Since part of
the reason, at least, for the success or failure of revolution lies in the
response of the government, we will also look briefly at counter-insurgency.

This will be a reading course, aimed at surveying the literature in the field.
We will cover the major theories and historiographical approaches, and I have
attempted to provide a reasonably wide coverage in terms of period and region.
Cases include the French revolution of 1789 and its sequels, the American
revolution, the Mexican, Russian and Iranian revolutions, insurgencies in
Central America, Peru and elsewhere, and Vietnam. The course is cross-listed
with sociology. I will post the syllabus on my web page:
<http://www.sunysb.edu/sociology/faculty/Roxborough/index.html>



**

FOR MA AND PhD HISTORY STUDENTS ONLY.

**  
  
* * *  
  
HIS 562  
Cross-listed  
CEG 534

|

Williams |

Thursday 6:00-9:00

|

SBS N303

  |

**_FIELD SEMINAR:  
MODERN AFRICA_**

The class will read a number of major works in common on topics central to
African history, especially the slave trade, European imperialism, colonial
rule, nationalism in Africa, and the problems of independent Africa. Each
student will write a bibliographical essay on an individual topic, and these
projects will be the basis for class reports and discussions in the latter
half of the semester.

There will be a number of readings in common: fiction by Chinua Achebe, a
general survey of the subject by Roland Oliver & Antony Atmore, a study of the
slave trade era by John Thornton. The second half of the course will have a
southern African emphasis: Marcia Wright and Belinda Bozzoli on women, and
works by Terence Ranger, Benedict Carton, and Leroy Vail and Landeg White. A
full syllabus will be available some time during the summer.



**

FOR MA, PhD AND MAT CANDIDATES. (MAT CANDIDATES MUST REGISTER UNDER CEG 534.)

**  
  


## [**_To Graduate 600 Level Courses_**](02fallgrad600.htm)  
  


* * *

  
[Home](../../index.html) | [Faculty](../../faculty/faculty.htm) |
[Graduate](../../graduate/graduate.htm) |
[Undergraduate](../../undergrad/undergrad.html) |
[Events](../../events/events.htm) | [Courses](../courses.htm) |
[Resources](../../resources/resources.htm) |
[Alumni](../../alumni/alumni.html)  
  
_[Last modified on 29 April 2002](../../inquiries.htm#Errors)_  
  
---

