Genetics 453 ![](../../../images/logo.gif)

## Genetics 453

### Evolutionary Genetics

#### Winter, 1997

  * News 
  * Description from the UW Course Catalog
  * Syllabus of lectures
  * [Distribution of scores for this year's midterm](midterm.dist.ps)
  * [Last year's midterm in Postscript for ftp-ing](midterm96.ps)
  * [Distribution of scores for the course this year (Postscript version) ](totals.ps)
  * [Distribution of scores for the course this year (text version) ](totals.html)
  * Books on reserve at Odegaard Undergraduate Library
  * [Archive of messages in the course newsgroup](news.html)
  * [Who is this guy who is teaching the course, anyway?](../../../faculty/felsenstein.html)
  * Why don't we have a textbook?
  * What are some other related courses?
  * What are some Internet resources on evolutionary biology?
  * Where can I get a copy of the genetic simulation computer program? 

* * *

**News about the course**

  * A rudimentary key for the final exam is available in J205 HSB (the Genetics Office) from the secretary at the front desk, Bill, who will allow you to copy it. There wasn't enough bulletin board space to post it. 
  * The grades are assigned and have been turned in. You can get back your exam by asking Bill in J205, the Genetics Department office. The course total score distribution is posted on the bulletin board outside J205 (and here on this web site too). 
  * The final exam is in J280 (the usual lecture room) at 2:30-4:30 on Wednesday, March 19. 
  * The review session for the final exam is in J280 at 3:30-4:30 on Friday, March 14. 
  * The course newsgroup is now available. It is called uwash.class.genet453. Messages will remain all quarter, and will also be archived here. 
  * My office hours are Thursdays at 2-3 pm in my office, J253 HSB. Alternatively, just come up and ask me after class, or ask me for an appointment. 
  * The office hours have been changed to 2:30-3:30, to avoid another conflict. 
  * There will be a review session for the midterm on Tuesday, February 11, at 2:30 in room J280 (the usual lecture room). 
  * I have noticed that a second edition of Mark Ridley's "Evolution" is now out. The page numbers in our syllabus are from the first edition. 

* * *

**Description from the UW Course Catalog**

GENET 453 **Genetics of the Evolutionary Process**  
Credits: 3  
Quarters: W  
Instructor: Felsenstein  
Gen. Educ.: NW  
Course Desc.: Contributions of genetics to the understanding of evolution.
Processes of mutation, selection, and random genetic events as they affect the
genetic architecture of natural populations and the process of speciation.
Emphasis on experimental data and observation, rather than mathematical
theory. Prerequisite: 371 or 372. Offered: W.

* * *

**Course syllabus**

    
    
    Genetics 453                                                      J. Felsenstein
    Evolutionary Genetics                                               Winter, 1997
    
                                    Syllabus
    
    Date        Topic                             Readings
    
    1/6-1/8     History of genetics in evolution  Futuyma, chap. 1
                                                  Ridley: Chap.1
                                                  JMS: 8-12
                                                  Greene, passim
    
    1/10-1/17   Elements of population genetics   H&C;: 17-19,31-37,147-159,184-185 
                                                  Futuyma: 82-85,150-159, 162-167,170-173
                                                  Ridley:  Chaps. 4-6
                                                  JMS: 31-47,24-27,1139-147
                                                  Li & Graur: Chap. 2
    
    1/20        (Martin Luther King Day holiday)
    
    1/22-1/24   more elements                     H&C;: 96-118,199-201,306-310, 550-553,61-66
                 of population genetics           Futuyma: 72-76,160,103-109, 120-131,142-143
                                                  Ridley:  Chaps. 4-6
                                                  JMS: as above
                                                  Li & Graur: as above
    
    1/27-1/29   Quantitative genetics             H&C;: 430-450,(450-465), 504-510
                                                  Futuyma: 87-91,195-202, (193), 207-210,214-215
                                                  Ridley:  Chap. 9
                                                  JMS: Chap. 6, esp. 93-117
    
    1/31-2/5    Kin and species selection,        H&C;: 560-569,586-596
                punctuated equilibrium, etc.      Futuyma: 111-115, Chap.8., 258-266,397-409
                                                  Ridley: Chaps. 12, 19, 20, and 21
                                                  JMS: Chap. 9, also 280-292
    
    2/7-2/10    Molecular variation               H&C;: 349-382,421-425,407-420
                                                  Lewontin, Chaps. 3 and 5
                                                  Futuyma: 444-459,472-481, 143-146,307-315,(286-306)
                                                  JMS: 49-57,65-77,139-147
                                                  Ridley: pp. 141-163
    
    2/12        Midterm exam                      Some or all of the above
    
    2/14        Molecular evolution               Li & Graur, chaps. 3-5
                                                  H&C;: 349-382,421-425,407-420
                                                  Ridley: pp. 164-182, Chaps. 10, 17
                                                  Futuyma: 444-459,472-481, 1143-146,307-315,(286-306)
                                                  JMS: 147-156,203-224
    2/17        (Presidents' Day holiday)
    
    2/19-2/28   Molecular evolution (continued)   same as previous
    
    3/3-3/7     Chromosome evolution              H&C;: 99-101,597-603
                                                  Futuyma: 60-65,301,303, 236-238
                                                  White: Chaps. 7,8,9,12,(11)
                                                  Stebbins, Chaps. 1,4,5
                                                  JMS: 67-69,224-229
                                                  Ridley: pp. 69-71, 74-75, 201
    
    3/10-3/14   Evolution of genetic systems      H&C;: 555-560
                                                  Futuyma: 261,265,279-282
                                                  JMS: Chaps. 13 and 14
                                                  Ridley: 199-203, 294-298
    (over)
    
    The final exam will be on Wednesday, March 19,  2:30-4:30 pm in the
    lecture room.
    
    The lecture of 1/17 will be given by Dr. Peter Beerli.  The lectures of
    2/19 and 2/21 will be given by Dr. Mary Kuhner.
    
    Abbreviations for authors of books (see the list of books on resrve at OUGL):
    
    H&C;:        Hartl and Clark
    JMS:        John Maynard Smith, Evolutionary Genetics
    
    Class newsgroup:  uwash.class.genet453
    Class Web site
        http://weber.u.washington.edu/~genetics/courses/genet453/1997/genet453.html
      (if you forget this, you can find it through Courses in the Genetics
       Department site which can be found from the main UW page.)
    
    

* * *

**Books on reserve at Odegaard Undergraduate Library**

    
    
    
    Call Number       Author/Title/Edition
     
    575               Greene, John C.        
    G833d             The death of Adam
    
    QH325             Li, Wen-Hsiung and Dan Graur
    .L65              Fundamentals of
    1991                molecular evolution
     
    QH 365            Darwin, Charles
    O2 1967           The origin of species
     
    QH366.2           Futuyma, Douglas
    .F87              Evolutionary Biology (2nd ed.)
    1986 
     
    QH 366.2          Ridley, Mark
    .R524             Evolution
    1993 
     
    QH366.2           Maynard Smith, John, and Eors Szathmary
    .M3918            The major transitions in evolution
    1995      
     
    QH366.2           Maynard Smith, John
    .M392             The theory of evolution
    1993     
     
    QH 371            Maynard Smith, John 
    .M327             Evolutionary Genetics
    1989 
     
    QH 431            Dobzhansky, Theodosius
    D577              Genetics of the evolutionary process
     
    QH455             Hartl, Daniel L.
    .H36              A primer of population
    1988                genetics, 2nd ed.
     
    QH455             Hartl, Daniel L. and Andrew Clark
    .H37              Principles of population
    1989               genetics, 2nd ed.
      
    QH 455            Lewontin, R.C.
    L48               The genetic basis of
                       evolutionary change
     
    QH 581.2          White, M. J. D.
    W45               Animal cytology and evolution
    1977      
     
    QK 981            Stebbins, George Ledyard 
    S74               Chromosomal evolution in
                       higher plants 
    
    

* * *

**Why don't we have a textbook?**

(I know it makes everyone insecure, but at the graduate level it is standard
not to have a textbook. If you go to grad school you'll have to get used to
it.) Mostly it's because I can't come up with one that covers adequately the
particular mix of topics I give. Make a suggestion on the course newsgroup and
we'll discuss it. I have considered or even used Futuyma, Maynard Smith's
"Evolutionary Genetics", and others but they don't work. I am trying to
compensate by handing out copies of my overheads each time.

* * *

**What are some other related courses?**

Biology 454      The main evolution course at the University, taught yearly by
Joel Kingsolver (Zoology Department) and Doug Schemske (Botany Department).
Both are well-known researchers in evolutionary biology. Text in past has been
Futuyma's "Evolutionary Biology"; This year it is Ridley's "Evolution". Winter
quarter.  Zoology 414      Molecular evolution course by Scott Edwards, who is
an active researcher in that area. Texts are Li and Graur "Fundamentals of
Molecular Evolution" and Avise "Molecular Markers". Winter quarter.  Genetics
562      Now given every other year, this is the graduate theoretical
evolutionary genetics course that I give. Lots of equations, though mostly at
a low mathematical level. No pictures of cute furry animals. Next time it's
given will be Spring, 1997. Text: my own notes, sold inexpensively by ASUW
Publications in the HUB.  (number not yet assigned)      This will be a
graduate-level course on Phylogenetic Inference. Methods for inferring
phylogenies, and methods for doing things with them. Some background in
statistics necessary. It will be given every other Spring under a number that
has not yet been assigned.  Others      There are more courses and I'll
gradually try to put descriptions of them here.

* * *

**What are some Internet resources on evolutionary biology?**

There are many:

**Newsgroups**

Some brief descriptions of some of the major ones covering evolution:

sci.bio.systematics      Discussion of systematics, including phylogeny and
classification. Most postings are serious discussions by researchers. Some
percentage of them are semantic issues or legalistic discussions of taxon
names.  bionet.molbio.evolution      Discussion among researchers about
molecular evolution. Low volume, high quality.  sci.bio.paleontology
Tends to be filled with postings by fossil enthusiasts and tends to be
dinosaur-centered. Some creation/evolution debating too.  bionet.population-
biology      Supposed to be the forum for discussion by population biologists.
But they don't post much there. Occasionally someone sees the "population" in
the group title and starts a discussion of human overpopulation issues, which
are best discussed elsewhere. This helps ensure that real population
biologists will continue to avoid the group.  sci.bio.evolution      Moderated
by Josh Hayes of our own Center for Quantitative Sciences, who should get some
sort of award for putting up with a lot of nonsense. I think it was intended
as a forum for discussion among researchers, but has tended to be filled with
postings by others about whether humans are still evolving (answer: yes, but
it's extremely slow compared to cultural change) and whether laughter is
selectively advantageous. Not intended for evolution/creation debates: Josh
screens these out.  talk.origins      The arena for endless debate between
creationists and others, with frequent digressions into theology. Extremely
high noise to signal ratio. When a decisive point is made, the opponent
changes the subject or just refuses to respond.

**World Wide Web Pages**

  * The amazing [ Tree of Life ](http://phylogeny.arizona.edu/tree/phylogeny.html), a phylogeny of all life, in the making. A professional data base system of systematics, in effect. 
  * My own [ PHYLIP ](http://evolution.genetics.washington.edu/phylip.html) free package of computer programs for inferring phylogenies. 
  * Want some DNA or protein sequences? How about getting them from the international database? Try the [Web pages of the databases](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) at the NCBI, the National Center for Biotechnology Information of the National Library of Medicine, in Bethesda, Maryland. Not for the faint-hearted. 
  * The [talk.origins Evolution FAQs](http://rumba.ics.uci.edu:8080/origins/faqs-evolution.html) (Frequently Asked Questions). 
  * The [Harvard Biopages evolution page](http://golgi.harvard.edu/biopages/evolution.html), with lots of links to other evolution resources. 

* * *

**Where can I get a copy of the genetic simulation program?**

The program is freely distributable. It is available from my workstation by
anonymous ftp. There you will find:

  * a 386 DOS executable version 
  * a pre-386 DOS version for those who have PC/XT or PC/AT-compatible machines 
  * a Macintosh version by Mark Wells with somewhat different features 
  * Source code in C that can be compiled on a Unix workstation with X windows 
  * an executable for DEC Alpha (OSF1) 
  * an executable for Sun SPARCstations 
To fetch any of these by ftp [ Click here
](ftp://evolution.genetics.washington.edu/pub/popgen) Try reading the README
file from that directory first.

* * *

This page maintained fitfully by Joe Felsenstein

