Genetics 453 ![](../../../images/logo.gif)

## Genetics 453

### Evolutionary Genetics

  * News 
  * Description from the UW Course Catalog
  * Syllabus of lectures
  * [Last year's midterm in Postscript for ftp-ing](midterm95.ps)
  * Books on reserve at Odegaard Undergraduate Library
  * [Archive of messages in the course newsgroup](news.html)
  * [Who is this guy who is teaching the course, anyway?](../../faculty/felsenstein.html)
  * Why don't we have a textbook?
  * What are some other related courses?
  * What are some Internet resources on evolutionary biology?
  * Where can I get a copy of the genetic simulation computer program? 

* * *

**News about the course**

  * The course newsgroup is now available. It is called uwash.class.genet453. Messages will remain all quarter, and will also be archived here. 
  * My office hours are Thursdays at 2-3 pm in my office, J253 HSB. 
  * There will be a review session for the midterm on Friday at 2pm \- 3pm in J280 (our usual room). 
  * The final exam will be given at 2:30-4:20 pm on March 13, in a room to be announced. 
  * The midterm will be D-209 Health Sciences Building. This is on the second floor of Health Sciences, about halfway along the complex, across the main corridor from the D wing which is where the dental school is. It is at the usual class meeting time, on Monday, February 5. 
  * The final exam will be in J280 HSB (the usual lecture room) from 2:30-4:20 pm o Wednesday, March 13. 
  * A Review Session will happen on Friday, March 8, at 3:00-4:30 in J280 HSB. 
  * The grading in Genetics 453 is completed. The final exams, on which your point totals and grades are marked too, will be available from the Department Office ( **J205 HSB** ) as of Monday morning. See the secretary in the desk nearest the door (he's new so I don't know his name). 

The point and grade distribution will be posted in the next news message in
this newsgroup and will be posted outside of J205.

Thanks for putting up with a certain amount of nonsense.

(Joe Miller -- please contact me if there has been a mixup concerning your
grades.)

  * **Distribution of total scores (midterm+homework+final)**

(each "-" covers a 3-point range centered at the score on the scale.
indication of grades is given too)

    
                                                       3.5
               2.0    2.3          2.8 3.0      3.3 !    3.8   4.0
                !      !            !   !        !  !     !     !
    
                                                          M
                                                          M
                                                 M  M     M
                                                 M  M M   M
                                    M            M  MMM   M M
                 M      M           M   M        MMMMMM M M M   M
              ----------------------------------------------------------
              ^         ^         ^         ^         ^        ^       ^
              150      180       210       240       270      300     325
    
    
    Here are the actual point totals, sorted:
    
     159 180 216 217 227 254 254 254 256 259
     260 263 264 264 265 268 268 269 269 271
     276 281 281 283 283 283 283 288 288 303
    

* * *

**Description from the UW Course Catalog**

GENET 453 **Genetics of the Evolutionary Process**  
Credits: 3  
Quarters: W  
Instructor: Felsenstein  
Gen. Educ.: NW  
Course Desc.: Contributions of genetics to the understanding of evolution.
Processes of mutation, selection, and random genetic events as they affect the
genetic architecture of natural populations and the process of speciation.
Emphasis on experimental data and observation, rather than mathematical
theory. Prerequisite: 371 or 372. Offered: W.

* * *

**Course syllabus**

    
    
    Genetics 453                                                      J. Felsenstein
    Evolutionary Genetics                                               Winter, 1996
    
                                    Syllabus
    
    Date        Topic                             Readings
    
    1/3-1/5     History of genetics in evolution  Futuyma, chap. 1
                                                  Ridley: Chap.1
                                                  JMS: 8-12
                                                  Greene, passim
    
    1/8-1/13    Elements of population genetics   H&C;: 17-19,31-37,147-159,184-185 
                                                  Futuyma: 82-85,150-159, 162-167,170-173
                                                  Ridley:  Chaps. 4-6
                                                  JMS: 31-47,24-27,1139-147
                                                  Li & Graur: Chap. 2
    
    1/15        (Martin Luther King Day holiday)
    
    1/17        more elements                     H&C;: 96-118,199-201,306-310, 550-553,61-66
                 of population genetics           Futuyma: 72-76,160,103-109, 120-131,142-143
                                                  Ridley:  Chaps. 4-6
                                                  JMS: as above
                                                  Li & Graur: as above
    
    1/19-1/24   Quantitative genetics             H&C;: 430-450,(450-465), 504-510
                                                  Futuyma: 87-91,195-202, (193), 207-210,214-215
                                                  Ridley:  Chap. 9
                                                  JMS: Chap. 6, esp. 93-117
    
    1/26        Species selection,                H&C;: 560-569,586-596
                punctuated equilibrium, etc.      Futuyma: 111-115, Chap.8., 258-266,397-409
                                                  Ridley: Chaps. 12, 19, 20, and 21
                                                  JMS: Chap. 9, also 280-292
    
    1/29        Guest lecture (to be arranged) 
    
    1/31-2/2    Species selection,                (same as 1/26)
                punctuated equilibrium, etc. 
    
    2/5         Midterm exam                      Some or all of the above
    
    2/7-2/9     Molecular variation               H&C;: 349-382,421-425,407-420
                                                  Lewontin, Chaps. 3 and 5
                                                  Futuyma: 444-459,472-481, 143-146,307-315,(286-306)
                                                  JMS: 49-57,65-77,139-147
                                                  Ridley: pp. 141-163
    
    2/12-2/16   Molecular evolution               Li & Graur, chaps. 3-5
                                                  H&C;: 349-382,421-425,407-420
                                                  Ridley: pp. 164-182, Chaps. 10, 17
                                                  Futuyma: 444-459,472-481, 1143-146,307-315,(286-306)
                                                  JMS: 147-156,203-224
    
    2/19        (Presidents' Day Holiday;
                 Darwin's birthday, nearly)
    
    2/21        more molecular evolution 
    
    2/23-2/28   Chromosome evolution              H&C;: 99-101,597-603
                                                  Futuyma: 60-65,301,303, 236-238
                                                  White: Chaps. 7,8,9,12,(11)
                                                  Stebbins, Chaps. 1,4,5
                                                  JMS: 67-69,224-229
                                                  Ridley: pp. 69-71, 74-75, 201
    
    3/1-3/8     Evolution of genetic systems      H&C;: 555-560
                                                  Futuyma: 261,265,279-282
                                                  JMS: Chaps. 13 and 14
                                                  Ridley: 199-203, 294-298
    
    
    Abbreviations for authors of books:
    
    H&C;:        Hartl and Clark
    JMS:         John Maynard Smith
    
    Class newsgroup:  uwash.class.genet453
    Class World Wide Web site
        http://weber.u.washington.edu/~genetics/courses/genet453/genet453.html
    

* * *

**Books on reserve at Odegaard Undergraduate Library**

    
    
               Books on Reserve in Undergraduate Library Reserve
    
                           All are 1-day reserve
    
    Call Number              Author/Title/Edition
    
     
    575                Greene, John C.	
    G833d                The death of Adam
      
    QH325              Li, Wen-Hsiung and Dan Graur
    .L65                 Fundamentals of
    1991                 molecular evolution
      
    QH 365             Darwin, Charles
    O2 1967              The origin of species
      
    QH366.2            Futuyma, Douglas
    .F87                 Evolutionary Biology (2nd ed.)
    1986  
      
    ???????            Ridley, Mark
    1993                 Evolution
      
    QH366.2            Maynard Smith, John, and Eors Szathmary
    .M3918               The major transitions in evolution
    1995       
      
    QH366.2            Maynard Smith, John
    .M392                The theory of evolution
    1993      
      
    QH 371             Maynard Smith, John 
    .M327                Evolutionary Genetics
    1989  
    
    QH 431             Dobzhansky, Theodosius
    D577                 Genetics of the evolutionary process
      
    QH455              Hartl, Daniel L.
    .H36                 A primer of population
    1988                 genetics, 2nd ed.
      
    QH455              Hartl, Daniel L. and Andrew Clark
    .H37                 Principles of population
    1989                 genetics, 2nd ed.
       
    QH 455             Lewontin, R.C.
    L48                  The genetic basis of evolutionary change
      
    QH 581.2           White, M. J. D.
    W45                  Animal cytology and evolution
    1977       
      
    QK 981             Stebbins, George Ledyard 
    S74            	     Chromosomal evolution in higher plants 
    

* * *

**Why don't we have a textbook?**

(I know it makes everyone insecure, but at the graduate level it is standard
not to have a textbook. If you go to grad school you'll have to get used to
it.) Mostly it's because I can't come up with one that covers adequately the
particular mix of topics I give. Make a suggestion on the course newsgroup and
we'll discuss it. I have considered or even used Futuyma, Maynard Smith's
"Evolutionary Genetics", and others but they don't work. I am trying to
compensate by handing out copies of my overheads each time.

* * *

**What are some other related courses?**

Biology 454      The main evolution course at the University, taught yearly by
Joel Kingsolver (Zoology Department) and Doug Schemske (Botany Department).
Both are well-known researchers in evolutionary biology. Text in past has been
Futuyma's "Evolutionary Biology" (not sure what it is this year). Winter
quarter.  Zoology 414      Molecular evolution course by Scott Edwards, who is
an active researcher in that area. New course. Remains to be seen what level
the course will be at, graduate or undergraduate. Texts are Li and Graur
"Fundamentals of Molecular Evolution" and Avise "Molecular Markers". Winter
quarter.  Genetics 562      Now given every other year, this is the graduate
theoretical evolutionary genetics course that I give. Lots of equations,
though mostly at a low mathematical level. No pictures of cute furry animals.
Next time it's given will be Spring, 1997. Text: my own notes, sold
inexpensively by ASUW Publications in the HUB.  Genetics 554      This topics
number will be used in Spring 1996 by me to give a graduate-level course on
Phylogenetic Inference. Methods for inferring phylogenies, and methods for
doing things with them. Some background in statistics necessary. After this
year it will be given every other Spring under another number.  Others
There are more courses and I'll gradually try to put descriptions of them
here.

* * *

**What are some Internet resources on evolutionary biology?**

There are many:

**Newsgroups**

Some brief descriptions of some of the major ones covering evolution:

sci.bio.systematics      Discussion of systematics, including phylogeny and
classification. Most postings are serious discussions by researchers. Some
percentage of them are semantic issues or legalistic discussions of taxon
names.  bionet.molbio.evolution      Discussion among researchers about
molecular evolution. Low volume, high quality.  sci.bio.paleontology
Tends to be filled with postings by fossil enthusiasts and tends to be
dinosaur-centered. Some creation/evolution debating too.  bionet.population-
biology      Supposed to be the forum for discussion by population biologists.
But they don't post much there. Occasionally someone sees the "population" in
the group title and starts a discussion of human overpopulation issues, which
are best discussed elsewhere. This helps ensure that real population
biologists will continue to avoid the group.  sci.bio.evolution      Moderated
by Josh Hayes of our own Center for Quantitative Sciences, who should get some
sort of award for putting up with a lot of nonsense. I think it was intended
as a forum for discussion among researchers, but has tended to be filled with
postings by others about whether humans are still evolving (answer: yes, but
it's extremely slow compared to cultural change) and whether genes for
homosexuality could persist. Not intended for evolution/creation debates: Josh
screens these out.  talk.origins      The arena for endless debate between
creationists and others, with frequent digressions into theology. Extremely
high noise to signal ratio. When a decisive point is made, the opponent
changes the subject or just refuses to respond.

**World Wide Web Pages**

  * The amazing [ Tree of Life ](http://phylogeny.arizona.edu/tree/phylogeny.html), a phylogeny of all life, in the making. A professional data base system of systematics, in effect. 
  * My own [ PHYLIP ](http://evolution.genetics.washington.edu/phylip.html) free package of computer programs for inferring phylogenies. 
  * Want some DNA or protein sequences? How about getting them from the international database? Try the [Web pages of the databases](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) at the NCBI, the National Center for Biotechnology Information of the National Library of Medicine, in Bethesda, Maryland. Not for the faint-hearted. 
  * The [talk.origins Evolution FAQs](http://rumba.ics.uci.edu:8080/origins/faqs-evolution.html) (Frequently Asked Questions). 
  * The [Harvard Biopages evolution page](http://golgi.harvard.edu/biopages/evolution.html), with lots of links to other evolution resources. 

* * *

**Where can I get a copy of the genetic simulation program?**

The program is freely distributable. It is available from my workstation by
anonymous ftp. There you will find:

  * a 386 DOS executable version 
  * a pre-386 DOS version for those who have PC/XT or PC/AT-compatible machines 
  * a Macintosh version by Mark Wells with somewhat different features 
  * Source code in C that can be compiled on a Unix workstation with X windows 
  * an executable for DEC Alpha (OSF1) 
  * an executable for Sun SPARCstations 
To fetch any of these by ftp [ Click here
](ftp://evolution.genetics.washington.edu/pub/popgen) Try reading the README
file from that directory first.

* * *

This page maintained fitfully by Joe Felsenstein

