=================================================================== [This
document can be acquired from a sub-directory coombspapers via anonymous FTP
or COOMBSQUEST gopher on the node COOMBS.ANU.EDU.AU or ANU Soc.Sci.WWW Server
at http://coombs.anu.edu.au/CoombsHome.html] The document's ftp filename and
the full directory path are given in the coombspapers top level INDEX files]
=================================================================== [Resources
listed in this issue of the document: 55] *** NOTE *** This resource is not
maintained any longer. For up-to-date information please see URL
http://coombs.anu.edu.au/WWWVL-Buddhism.html
=================================================================== BUDDHIST
ELECTRONIC RESOURCES DIRECTORY (B.E.R.D) version/edition: 1.12 Date: 8 January
1996] by Dr T.Matthew Ciolek  Australian National University Copyright (c)
1993,1994 by T.Matthew Ciolek URL:
ftp://coombs.anu.edu.au/coombspapers/otherarchives/electronic-buddhist-archi
ves/buddhism-general/e-resources/buddh-electr-rsrc-dir-berd.txt (This document
is also available in the form of an on-line data-base: ANU-Buddhist-Electrn-
Rsrces) The "=>" marker indicates an internal cross-reference This is a world-
wide directory of the computer network addresses of research facilities,
archives, research centers, on-line databases and resources of interest to the
scholars and students of Buddhism. Users of this directory are WARMLY INVITED
TO send any additions or corrections [following, if possible, the BERD's
format] to: Dr T. Matthew Ciolek, Coombs Computing Unit, RSSS/RSPAS,
Australian National University e-mail (internet) tmciolek@coombs.anu.edu.au
******************************** UMichigan Clearinghouse details:
******************************** title: Buddhist Electronic Resources
Directory (B.E.R.D) version/edition: 1.12 update frequency: This resource is
not maintained any longer. For up-to-date information please see URL
http://coombs.anu.edu.au/WWWVL-Buddhism.html date: 8 January 1996
author/contact name: T.M.Ciolek author/contact e-mail
address:tmciolek@coombs.anu.edu.au institution: Australian National University
descriptive keywords: guide, internet, bitnet, buddhism, resources, networking
intended audience: academics, researchers, postgraduate students
=================================================================== NAME: AAR
Buddhism Section Newsletter RESOURCE: E-journal LOCATION: ?, USA ACCESS: Back
issues [from the #19 (1993) onwards] are available by anonymous ftp and/or
COOMBSQUEST gopher at COOMBS.ANU.EDU.AU (=>Electronic Buddhist Archives &
=>Buddhist Studies Facility) INQUIRIES: Jamie HUBBARD , Smith College, USA.
COMMENTS: A paper/electronic newsletter serving the members of the Buddhist
Section of the American Academy of Religion. ENTRY UPDATED: 9 November 93 # #
# NAME: AAR Electronic Publications Committee RESOURCE: Research group
LOCATION: Dept.of East Asian Languages, Univ.of California, Berkeley, USA
ACCESS: ? INQUIRIES: e-mail to: Lewis LANCASTER  FAX (510) 642-603; Tel (510)
642-3485 COMMENTS: L. Lancaster is the Chair of the American Academy of
Religions' Electronic Publications Committee (formed 1993). The committee
promotes development, distribution and use of databases concerning religion.
It is planned that the AAR will distribute Mahidol University's Pali CD. It
also plans to publish a CD containing all back issues of the AAR's 14 journals
and an electronic dissertation series. The AAR is planning to distribute the
Tipitaka portion of the Siam Edition in CD ROM format in April 1994. ENTRY
UPDATED: 15 March 1994 # # # NAME: Access To Insight RESOURCE: BBS LOCATION:
Barre, Massachusetts, USA ACCESS: dial-up BBS, ACCESS TO INSIGHT,
1-508-433-5847; Mail server handles file requests via e-mail (ftpmail)
INQUIRIES: e-mail to: John BULLITT  or our infoserver  COMMENTS: The sysop,
John Bullitt, is on the Board of Directors of =>DharmaNet International, and
his BBS is an electronic link to the Barre Center for Buddhist Studies,
Insight Meditation Society, and the Cambridge Insight Meditation Center. John
also coordinates DharmaNet's Dharma Book Transcription Project, in cooperation
with the Buddhist Publication Society in Sri Lanka, and with other authors and
publishers. ENTRY UPDATED: 17 January 1994 # # # NAME: ACIP Tibetan Electronic
Texts Archive RESOURCE: FTP archive LOCATION: New Mexico, USA [original
archive] & Canberra, Australia [mirror archive] ACCESS: Anon. FTP to
COOMBS.ANU.EDU.AU , sub-directory /coombspapers/otherarchives/asian-studies-
archives/ acip-tibet-e-texts-archive/ The archive is also available via the
COOMBSQUEST gopher (coombs.anu.edu.au) INQUIRIES: , Consortium for Lexical
Research, New Mexico State University, USA DATE OF CREATION: 1990 COMMENTS:
The Archives contain several documents including: * "The Philosophical
Dictionary" consisting of Twelve Major Native Tibetan Philosophical Works *
The Complete Cataloged Listings of Sanskrit Works in the United States Library
of Congress * The Updated Cataloged Listings of Tibetan Works in the United
States Library of Congress * Specialized Computer Programs for the Study and
Analysis of the Asian Classics * Digital form and documentation of The Asian
Classics Input Project: A WAIS database =>ANU-Tibetan-ACIP-Catalog provides an
on-line index to the Archives' holdings. To order disks, brochures, ACIP
programs, print-outs in native script; to make a tax-exempt contribution of
used computer equipment; or for general project updates, contact: THE ASIAN
CLASSICS INPUT PROJECT Washington Area Office 11911 Marmary Road Gaithersburg,
Maryland USA 20878-1839 telephone: (301) 948-5569 contact: Dr. Robert Taylor,
assistant project director email: acip@well.sf.ca.us For questions on
editorial content, text input schedules, project participation, submission of
errors found, or support of proposals for related efforts, contact: THE ASIAN
CLASSICS INPUT PROJECT New York Area Office c/o The Princeton Club of New York
Box 57 15 West 43rd Street New York, New York USA 10036 telephone: (201)
364-1824 attention: Michael Roach, project director John Malpas, chief
programmer To learn more about the ACIP overseas data entry center, or for
advice on setting up a similar operation overseas, contact: Sera Mey Dratsang
Mahayana Philosophy University Bylakuppe 571-104, Mysore District Karnataka
State, India attention: Khen Rinpoche Geshe Lobsang Tharchin, Abbot Ven.
Thupten Pelgye, manager, Sera Mey Computer Center Several of the ACIP
materials are also available via the =>BodhiNet - Buddhist Network ENTRY
UPDATED: 25 July 1994 # # # NAME: ANU-Asian-Religions RESOURCE: WAIS database
LOCATION: Aust. National Univ., Canberra, Australia ACCESS: via the standard
WAIS software and through the =>Buddhist Studies Facility on COOMBSQUEST
gopher (coombs.anu.edu.au and cheops.anu.edu.au) INQUIRIES: Dr T.Mathew CIOLEK
e-mail to: tmciolek@coombs.anu.edu.au DATE OF CREATION: Version 2.1 Sep 1993;
Version 1.0 Jun 1992; COMMENTS: A collection of bibliographic references to
the selected (mainly Buddhist) Asian religions. The data used for construction
of this server were supplied by: Dr T. Matthew Ciolek, Austr. Nat'l Univ. -
Zen Buddhism & recent French publications on Sufism, Hassidism, Taoism; Mr
Barry Howarth, Austr. Nat'l Univ. - Taoism; Dr John MacRae, Cornell Univ., USA
- Chinese Buddhism; Dr Geoffrey Samuel, Newcastle Univ. - Tibetan Buddh.; Lama
Choedak T. Yuthok, Canberra - Tibetan Buddhism; ENTRY UPDATED: 14 July 1994 #
# # NAME: ANU-Buddha-L RESOURCE: WAIS database LOCATION: Aust. National Univ.,
Canberra, Australia ACCESS: via the standard WAIS software and through the
=>Buddhist Studies Facility on COOMBSQUEST gopher (coombs.anu.edu.au and
cheops.anu.edu.au) INQUIRIES: Dr T.Mathew CIOLEK e-mail to:
tmciolek@coombs.anu.edu.au DATE OF CREATION: Version 1.0 Jul 1994; COMMENTS: A
collection of transactions and scholarly exchanges of 600 + subscribers to the
=>BUDDHA-L - Buddhist Academic Discussion Forum . At present (Jul94) the
database contains 4.5 Mb od data worth of high quality BUDDHA-L e-mail
messages from the period July 1993 - June 1994. More data (including earlier
log files) are planned to be regularly added in the forthcoming months.The
database has been constructed as a co-operative project involving Richard P.
Hayes, McGill Univ, Canada; Jim Cocks, Univ. of Louisville, USA and T.Matthew
Ciolek, Australian National Univ, Australia. ENTRY UPDATED: 14 July 1994 # # #
NAME: ANU-Buddhist-Electrn-Rsrces RESOURCE: WAIS database LOCATION: Aust.
National Univ., Canberra, Australia ACCESS: via the standard WAIS software and
through the =>Buddhist Studies Facility on COOMBSQUEST gopher
(coombs.anu.edu.au and cheops.anu.edu.au) INQUIRIES: Dr T.Mathew CIOLEK e-mail
to: tmciolek@coombs.anu.edu.au DATE OF CREATION: Nov 1993 COMMENTS: a database
version of this (i.e. Buddhist Electronic Resources Directory) document stored
at the Coombspaper's =>Electronic Buddhist Archives. ENTRY UPDATED: 14 July
1994 # # # NAME: ANU-Cheng-Tao-Ko-Verses RESOURCE: WAIS database LOCATION:
Aust. National Univ., Canberra, Australia ACCESS: via the standard WAIS
software and through the =>Buddhist Studies Facility on COOMBSQUEST gopher
(coombs.anu.edu.au and cheops.anu.edu.au) INQUIRIES: Dr T.Mathew CIOLEK e-mail
to: tmciolek@coombs.anu.edu.au DATE OF CREATION: Nov 1993 COMMENTS: CHENG-TAO-
KO [Zhengdaoge], Shodoka (J.), Song of Enlightenment. A collection of 64
verses from the T'ang Dynasty China, attributed to the Zen Master Yung-chia
Hsuan-chueh [Yongjia Xuanjue], aka Yoka Genkaku (J.) (665-713), and presenting
the basic tenets of the Ch'an (Zen) Buddhism. Transl.from the Japanese was
prepared by Robert Aitken Roshi and Eido Shimano Roshi. ENTRY UPDATED: 14 July
1994 # # # NAME: ANU-Dhammapada-Verses RESOURCE: WAIS database LOCATION: Aust.
National Univ., Canberra, Australia ACCESS: via the standard WAIS software and
through the =>Buddhist Studies Facility on COOMBSQUEST gopher
(coombs.anu.edu.au and cheops.anu.edu.au) INQUIRIES: Dr T.Mathew CIOLEK e-mail
to: tmciolek@coombs.anu.edu.au DATE OF CREATION: Nov 1993 COMMENTS: An
anthology of 423 Buddhist verses embodying ethical and spiritual precepts
arranged by subject. This 1993 translation from the Pali was prepared by John
Richards  ENTRY UPDATED: 14 July 1994 # # # NAME: ANU-Thai-Yunnan RESOURCE:
WAIS database LOCATION: Aust. National Univ., Canberra, Australia ACCESS: via
the standard WAIS software and through the =>Buddhist Studies Facility on
COOMBSQUEST gopher (coombs.anu.edu.au and cheops.anu.edu.au) INQUIRIES: Dr.
Gehan WIJEYEWARDENE e-mail to: gew400@coombs.anu.edu.au DATE OF CREATION: May
1992 COMMENTS: A 1.5 Mb strong collection of the annotated bibliographic
references and late dr Richard Davis' research notes collection of the Thai-
Yunnan Project, Dept. of Anthropology, RSPacS Australian National University,
Canberra ACT 0200. Phone: +61 6 249 2162; fax: +61 6 257 1893\. Materials deal
with Burma, Laos, Northern Thailand and Southern China, with numerous data on
Theravada Buddhism and Buddhists in that region. ENTRY UPDATED: 14 July 1994 #
# # NAME: ANU-Tibetan-ACIP-Catalog RESOURCE: WAIS database LOCATION: Aust.
National Univ., Canberra, Australia ACCESS: via the standard WAIS software and
through the =>Buddhist Studies Facility on COOMBSQUEST gopher
(coombs.anu.edu.au and cheops.anu.edu.au) INQUIRIES: WAIS dbase inquiries: Dr
T.Mathew CIOLEK e-mail to: tmciolek@coombs.anu.edu.au Tibetan etexts
inquiries: Consortium for Lexical Research, New Mexico State University, USA.
DATE OF CREATION: Dec 1993 COMMENTS: Tibetan Electronic Texts Input by Asian
Classics Input Project (ACIP) This WAIS database provides a November 1993 list
of titles of Tibetan classics (religious works, catalogues, and dictionaries)
already input by Asian Classics Input Project (ACIP) and available via => ACIP
Tibetan Electronic Texts Archive at COOMBS.ANU.EDU.AU:
/coombspapers/otherarchives/asian-studies-archives/acip-tibet-e-texts-archive/
ENTRY UPDATED: 25 July 1994 # # # NAME: ANU-Tibetan-Electrn-Rsrces RESOURCE:
WAIS database LOCATION: Aust. National Univ., Canberra, Australia ACCESS: via
the standard WAIS software and through the COOMBSQUEST gopher
(coombs.anu.edu.au and cheops.anu.edu.au) INQUIRIES: Dr T.Mathew CIOLEK e-mail
to: tmciolek@coombs.anu.edu.au DATE OF CREATION: Dec 1993 COMMENTS: a database
version of this (i.e. Tibetan Electronic Resources Guide) document stored at
the Coombspaper's Tibetan Archives /coombspapers/otherarchives/asian-studies-
archives/tibetan-archives/networked-inf-sources The database utilises all
Tibet/Tibetan related records from the ANU-Buddhist-Electrn-Rsrces dbase and
thus from the "BERD" document. ENTRY UPDATED: 25 July 1994 # # # NAME: ANU-
ZenBuddhism-Calendar RESOURCE: WAIS database LOCATION: Aust. National Univ.,
Canberra, Australia ACCESS: via the standard WAIS software and through the
=>Buddhist Studies Facility on COOMBSQUEST gopher (coombs.anu.edu.au and
cheops.anu.edu.au) INQUIRIES: Dr T.Mathew CIOLEK e-mail to:
tmciolek@coombs.anu.edu.au DATE OF CREATION: July 1993 COMMENTS: A data base
of dates, anniversaries and festivals of Zen Buddhism. It has been prepared on
the basis of materials collected by Dr. T.M.Ciolek for his planned book on the
history of the contemporary Zen Buddhism. ENTRY UPDATED: 14 July 1994 # # #
NAME: ANU-ZenBuddhism-L RESOURCE: WAIS database LOCATION: Aust. National
Univ., Canberra, Australia ACCESS: via the standard WAIS software and through
the =>Buddhist Studies Facility on COOMBSQUEST gopher (coombs.anu.edu.au and
cheops.anu.edu.au) INQUIRIES: Dr T.Mathew CIOLEK e-mail to:
tmciolek@coombs.anu.edu.au DATE OF CREATION: August 1993 COMMENTS: A data base
of exchanges and discussions of the => ZenBuddhism-L scholarly electronic
forum. ENTRY UPDATED: 25 July 1994 # # # NAME: BodhiNet - Democractic Buddhist
Network RESOURCE: BBS Echomail Network (soon to be ported as a listserve)
LOCATION: Worldwide ACCESS: dial-up on a number of BBS's. For location nearest
you, write to: bodhinet.nodes@tigerteam.org CURRENT ADMINISTRATOR: BodhiNet is
a democratic network, so leadership may change periodically. The current
Coordinator is Jeffrey Macko, who can be reached at: jmacko@tigerteam.org
INQUIRIES: Jeffrey MACKO , or Jeffrey.Macko@f658.n125.z1.fidonet.org COMMENTS:
BodhiNet is a democratically run Fidonet-Technology Network seeking to provide
international BBS systems with online Buddhist conferences. BodhiNet will soon
port its conferences to the internet in listserve format. For current
information on the porting issue, contact bodhinet.listserve@tigerteam.org.
ACCESS: for each of the many groups see details below COMMENTS: The ECHOMAIL
conferences running so far: BN_AMONK On Dharma (Ask-A-Monk) - Ask Practice
Related Questions to ordained monks and nuns of the Dharma Realm Buddhist
Association. Hosted by Bhikshu Heng Sure. BN_EARLY Early Buddhist Philosophy -
The original 18 schools of Indian Buddhism and their philosophical
contribution to modern Buddhist understanding. Hosted by Gary Ray BN_LIFE The
Life of the Buddha - A discussion of the Buddha's life and what it means for
Buddhist practice. BN_BASIC Basic Buddhist Teachings - Where beginner and
intermediate students can question, discuss and clarify understanding of
Buddhist teachings. BN_BPF Buddhist Peace Fellowship - Information and Events
Hosted by BPF National Coordinator, Alan Senauke. BN_BOOKS Buddhist Books -
The latest in Buddhist practice and academic books. Great place to find
bilbiographies. Studies graduate student Gary Ray. BN_EVENT Sangha Events -
Events and Practice Centers. National and Internation Events that effect the
Buddhist community -- retreats, conferences, projects and any other relevant
information. BN_KARMA Karma Klub - For sale and detailed information regarding
practice related items, books and paraphenelia. BN_ZEN Soto & Rinzai Zen -
Comprehensive discussions of Zen Buddhism. Where Zen Buddhist practice and Zen
academic studies can learn from each other. Host: Gary Ray - Zen Buddhist lay
monk and Buddhist Studies MA Student. BUDD_ACAD Academic Buddhism - For
discussion of buddhism in an scholarly framework. Host: Gary Ray, Buddhist
Studies MA Student 72:1000/658 BDSTWOMEN Women & Buddhism - The role of women
in Buddhism. Focused on how women, who have been marginalized in the past, can
play an active role in the Buddhist community. Moderator: Kate Harper BN_DAILY
Buddhism and Daily Life - How we live our lives. Very few of us live in a
monastery or similar environment, how do we bring our spirituality to our
every day lives? Moderator: Michael Jacob AMSTY_INT News and postings of
Amnesty International - Amnesty International is an organization devoted to
bringing those unjustly held, freedom. Moderator: Jennifer Pennington BN_TIBET
Tibetan Bon - The indigenous religion of Tibet is intimately linked with
Tibetan Buddhism. Any understanding of Tibetan Buddhist practice requires a
firm grounding in Bon philosophy and practice. Likewise, a true Bon
understanding lies in Buddhist doctrine. Hosted by John Bidleman BN_BON
Tibetan Buddhism - Theory and practice of Tibetan Buddhism and Tibetan
culture. Hosted by John Bidleman Also, the BodhiNet has received permission to
*officially* distribute =>ACIP files, including unfinished texts, tantric
materials, and about 40 woodblock prints in PCX format. The unfinished
collection is approx. two or three times as large as the completed collection.
ENTRY UPDATED: 17 February 1994 # # # NAME: BUDDHA-L RESOURCE: Electronic-
forum LOCATION: Univ. of Louisville, USA ACCESS: exchanges distributed daily
to the members via the e-mail INQUIRIES: e-mail to: Jim COCKS, Univ. of
Louisville, INTERNET ADDRESS: JACOCK01@ULKYVM.LOUISVILLE.EDU BITNET ADDRESS:
JACOCK01@ULKYVM DATE OF CREATION : 22 October 1991 COMMENTS: this Buddhist
Studies scholarly discussion group can be joined by sending an e-mail message
"Subscribe BUDDHA-L yourname yoursurname, org affiliation" to (Internet):
BUDDHA-L@ULKYVM.LOUISVILLE.EDU. Proceedings of the forum are now (since 1994)
accessible from the =>ANU-Buddha-L wais database, also available following
gopher menu: Name=Search the "ANU-Buddha-L" database Type=7 Port=70
Path=waissrc:/Coombs-db/ANU-Buddha-L.src Host=cheops.anu.edu.au ENTRY UPDATED:
25 July 1994 # # # NAME: BUDDHA-L fileserver RESOURCE: Listserv based
fileserver LOCATION: Univ. of Louisville, USA ACCESS: to retrieve, say, file
ABCXYZ from the filserver send an e-mail message Send to:
listserv@ulkyvm.louisville.edu Subject: GET ABCXYZ INQUIRIES: e-mail to: Jim
COCKS, Univ. of Louisville, INTERNET ADDRESS: JACOCK01@ULKYVM.LOUISVILLE.EDU
BITNET ADDRESS: JACOCK01@ULKYVM COMMENTS: To get a listing of all files
available on the BUDDHA-L fileserver send a mail message: Send to:
listserv@ulkyvm.louisville.edu Subject: GET BUDDHA-L FILELIST On the 1st June
94 the Fileserver's contents were as follows: * BUDDHA-L FILELIST for
LISTSERV@ULKYVM. *
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: * *
The GET/PUT authorization codes shown with each file entry describe * who is
authorized to GET or PUT the file: * * ALL = Everybody * CTL = Local LISTSERV
controllers (also known as "postmasters") * *
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: MOVIE
REVIEWS ALL CTL V 72 397 94/05/31 11:22:01 John McRae's Listing of
Movies/Videos Depicting Asian Religions LITTLE BUDDHA ALL CTL V 61 186
94/05/26 10:13:59 Little Buddha movie review by NY Times VISION MAHAYANA ALL
CTL V 72 1370 94/05/03 09:42:28 Paul Mus's Vision of Mahayana in "Total India"
FORT SUR ALL CTL V 67 114 93/12/21 11:16:42 Introduction to Buddhism (A. Fort
at TCU) LATI RINPOCHE ALL CTL V 72 317 93/05/14 10:02:58 Lati Rinpoche
interview ENTRY UPDATED: 1 June 1994 # # # NAME: BuddhaNet RESOURCE: BBS
LOCATION: Sydney, Australia ACCESS: dial-up BBS, +61-2-202 3061 (Intl); (02)
202 3061 (Australia) INQUIRIES: Ven. Bhante PANNYAVARO (sysop), BDMA Inc., 14
Smith St., Surry Hills NSW 2081,Tel (02) 212 3071. POSTAL ADDRESS: Buddha
Dhamma Meditation Association Inc., PO Box K1020, Haymarket NSW Australia
2010. COMMENTS: BuddhaNet is open to any organisation or person with an access
to a modem. File areas: [what is buddhism; meditation; zen practice; buddhist
art; poetry; australian buddhist organisations list, mangala sutta]
Conference/message areas: [women in buddhism; theravada; meditation; tibet
news, haiku, sangha, zen and many more]. Receives regular updates from the
=>DharmaNet in USA. ENTRY UPDATED: 21 December 94 # # # NAME: BUDDHIST
RESOURCE: Electronic-forum LOCATION: Japan ACCESS: Exchanges are distributed
to the members via the e-mail. INQUIRIES: Yoshiyuki Kawazoe (Bitnet)
kawazoe@jpntohok.bitnet DATE OF CREATION: August 1989 COMMENTS: Forum on
Indian and Buddhist Studies. The group can be joined by sending an e-mail
message "subscribe BUDDHIST 'firstname' 'lastname' " to :
listserv@jpntuvm0.bitnet. ENTRY UPDATED: 25 July 94 # # # NAME: Buddhist
Bibliographic Project RESOURCE: Research group LOCATION: Dept of Religious
Studies, Stanford University, California, USA INQUIRIES: Dr Max MOERMAN
INTERNET ADDRESS: moerman@leland.stanford.edu COMMENTS: A group of graduate
students and faculty under the leadership of Carl Bielefeldt and Bernard Faure
in the Department of Religious Studies at Stanford Univ. are conducting a
bibliographic project that will collect research materials in Buddhist Studies
and make this information available to all interested scholars in the form of
an annotated computerized guide. The project will include the most useful and
important primary and secondary reference materials in all areas of Buddhist
Studies and the related fields of Asian languages, literature, and history.
The result will be a bibliography, formatted in Endnote Plus, of materials in
modern Asian and European languages that can be searched, edited, updated,
reproduced and shared electronically. Contributions and input from all
interested parties who have or have produced bibliographies and bibliographic
guides in Buddhist Studies in general or in their specific research areas are
solicited and most welcome. ENTRY UPDATED: 25 October 93 # # # NAME: Buddhist
Iconography Database RESOURCE: Mac/Laserdisc database LOCATION: Dept of the
History of Art, Ohio State Univ., Columbus, USA ACCESS: ? INQUIRIES: Dr. John
C. HUNTINGTON e-mail to: jhunting@magnus.acs.ohio-state.edu; History Of Art
(College Of The Arts), 100 Hayes Hall 108 N Oval Mall Columbus, Oh 43210, USA;
Fax (614) 292-4401; Tel (614) 292-7481 DATE OF CREATION: ? COMMENTS: A
database of slides of Buddhist art and iconography from all over Asia.
Classified according to themses and particular elements. In 1993 the volume of
data was approx 3 Gigabytes. ENTRY UPDATED: 5 November 93 # # # NAME: Buddhist
Image Bank RESOURCE: FTP Archive LOCATION: U. Nth Carolina, at Chapel Hill,
USA ACCESS: ftp (or ncftp) to sunsite.unc.edu and login as anonymous, using
your email address for your password. Change directory (cd) to:
pub/academic/religious_studies/Buddhism/Tantric_Studies/Iconography.
INQUIRIES: Barry Kapke by e-mail (dharma@netcom.com) or postal mail to
DharmaNet International, PO Box 4951, Berkeley CA 94704-4951 USA. DATE OF
CREATION: ? COMMENTS: The databank is hosted by the Society for Tantric
Studies and =>DharmaNet International. Thanks to the assistance of Edward Van
Tassel and Gunnar Reitel, many of the Tibetan Buddhist GIFs have been
identified. ENTRY UPDATED: 16 August 94 # # # NAME: BUDDHIST-PHILOSOPHY
RESOURCE: Electronic-forum LOCATION: USA ACCESS: Exchanges are distributed to
the members via the e-mail. INQUIRIES: Dr Kent D.Palmer  COMMENTS: Forum on
Buddhist Philosophy. The group can be joined by sending the following message
to majordomo@world.std.com: subscribe BUDDHIST-PHILOSOPHY yourfullname
userid@internet.address EXCHANGES should be directed to: buddhist-
philosophy@world.std.com In early Feb 94 there 123 subscribers to the list
COMMENTS2: majordomo@world.std.com is a platform for several other
philosophical forums. suggestions for creation of new specialist lists are
accepted. A Computer Bulletin Board System (THINKNET BBS) is also associated
with these lists supporting more general discussion and storing the backlog.
To access the BBS call 714-638-0876. QWK mail readers are supported. Thinknet
BBS is a member of DialogNet which is a network of Philosophy oriented BBS
systems. ENTRY UPDATED: 25 July 1994 # # # NAME: Buddhist Internet Pointers
RESOURCE: WWW Page LOCATION: USA ACCESS:
http://coombs.anu.edu.au/WWWVLPages/BuddhPages/BuddhPointers.html or,
alternatively, to retrieve the file, called BUDDHIST HTML, send a mail
message: Send to: listserv@ulkyvm.louisville.edu Subject: GET BUDDHIST HTML
INQUIRIES: Hsuan Peng  COMMENTS: Directory of Buddhist on-line and off-line
resources. Last update: 8 Dec 1994. This file was converted to HTML format by
Connie Neal, 19 Dec 94 and stored on the "Buddha-L" system at the
listserv@ulkyvm.louisville.edu ENTRY UPDATED: 21 December 1994 # # # NAME:
Buddhist Research Information Centre (BRIC) RESOURCE: Research group LOCATION:
Buddhist & Pali University at Baudhaloka Mawatha, Colombo, Sri Lanka ACCESS:
??? INQUIRIES: Vice Chancellor, Buddhist & Pali University, Baudhaloka
Mawatha, Colombo 7, Sri Lanka e-mail to: Prof. V. K. Samaranayake"  DATE OF
CREATION: May 1993 COMMENTS: The Buddhist & Pali University at Baudhaloka
Mawatha, Colombo 7 is to establish a Buddhist Research Information Centre with
UNESCO assistance. To begin with they have arranged two workshops one local
and one international during Dec 93 and Jan 94 resp. The Buddhist & Pali
University invites those interested to share with them relevant information
and Buddhist research material in your possession and to send views, comments,
ideas,questions on this project. Correspondance and replies should be directed
to Vice Chancellor, Buddhist & Pali University, Baudhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 7,
Sri Lanka. E-Mail messages sent to  will be sent to them. ENTRY UPDATED: 9
December 1993 # # # NAME: Buddhist Studies Facility (COOMBSQUEST,ANU)
RESOURCE: Gopher LOCATION: Aust. National Univ., Canberra, Australia ACCESS:
via COOMBSQUEST gopher to coombs.anu.edu.au 150.203.76.2 or, alternatively,
cheops.anu.edu.au 150.203.76.24 (subdirectory Selected Social Sciences Study
Facilities) INQUIRIES: Dr T.Mathew CIOLEK e-mail to:
tmciolek@coombs.anu.edu.au DATE OF CREATION: May 1993 COMMENTS: A gopher based
system linking electronic archives, databases as well as individual documents
world-wide dealing with the Buddhism as well as other Asian religions (Bahai,
Hinduism, Islam, Taoism). It is a part of the wider information system called
"COOMBSQUEST - Social Sciences & Humanities Information Facility at the
Australian National University". Makes several direct links to the
=>Electronic Buddhist Archives as well as to the following resources: =>ANU-
Asian-Religions =>ANU-Buddha-L =>ANU-Buddhist-Electrn-Rsrces =>ANU-Thai-Yunnan
=>ANU-Tibetan-ACIP-Catalog =>ANU-ZenBuddhism-Calendar =>ANU-ZenBuddhism-L
=>Clear Mind =>Gassho =>Tantric-News ENTRY UPDATED: 14 July 1994 # # # NAME:
Buddhist Studies - World Wide Web Virtual Library RESOURCE: WWW Server
LOCATION: Aust. National Univ., Canberra, Australia ACCESS: via WWW client
software (eg. Mosaic or Lynx browsers) pointed at
http://coombs.anu.edu.au/WWWVL-Buddhism.html and through the =>Coombsweb WWW
Server (http://coombs.anu.edu.au/CoombsHome.html) and through the World Wide
Web Virtual Library Server
(http://info.cern.ch/hypertext/DataSources/bySubject/Overview.html) INQUIRIES:
DATE OF CREATION: September 1994 COMMENTS: In September 1994 the Coombs
Computing Unit, RSSS/RSPAS, ANU has been invited by CERN (Geneva,Switzerland)
to moderate the Buddhist Studies area of the CERN's international directory of
networked research and educational resources (WWW Virtual Library). The
Buddhist Studies WWW VL server is closely interlinked with the =>Coombsweb
system and the =>Social Sciences - World Wide Web Virtual Library. This WWW
server keeps track of leading information facilities in the field of Buddhism
and Buddhist Studies. ENTRY UPDATED: 6 September 1994 # # # NAME: Chogye Zen
Buddhism WWW Server RESOURCE: World Wide Web LOCATION: University of Texas,
HSC, Houston,USA ACCESS:
http://oac3.hsc.uth.tmc.edu/staff/snewton/zen/index.html INQUIRIES: Steven E.
NEWTON e-mail to: snewton@oac.hsc.uth.tmc.edu DATE OF CREATION: January 1994
COMMENTS: A WWW based system serving hyper-text (HTLM) Zen Buddhism documents
(incl. a glossary of Zen terms), and offering a gopher link to the =>Chogye
Zen Texts Archive and the =>Electronic Buddhist Archives. ENTRY UPDATED: 30
September 1994 # # # NAME: Chogye Zen Texts Archive RESOURCE: Gopher LOCATION:
University of Texas, HSC, Houston,USA ACCESS: Gopher pointer: Name=Chogye Zen
Texts Archive [sutras] (UT Houston-HSC,USA) Type=1 Port=70
Path=1/computers/oac_staff/S_Newton/zen Host=oac3.hsc.uth.tmc.edu WWW pointer:
http://oac3.hsc.uth.tmc.edu/staff/snewton/zen/index.html INQUIRIES: Steven E.
NEWTON e-mail to: snewton@oac.hsc.uth.tmc.edu DATE OF CREATION: August 1993
COMMENTS: A gopher based system linking electronic archives, databases as well
as individual documents world-wide dealing with the Zen Buddhism. Makes
several a direct link to the =>Electronic Buddhist Archives. In Jan 94 the
gopher-based system became a sub-set of the =>Buddhist WWW Server ENTRY
UPDATED: 25 July 1994 # # # NAME: Clear Mind Newsletter RESOURCE: E-journal
LOCATION: Canberra, Australia ACCESS: available by anonymous ftp and/or
COOMBSQUEST gopher at COOMBS.ANU.EDU.AU (=>Electronic Buddhist Archives &
=>Buddhist Studies Facility). The Journal is also accessible from the
following gopher menu: # Name=CLEAR-MIND - Tibetan Buddh.Newsletter
(CICnet,USA) Type=1 Port=70 Path=1/e-serials/alphabetic/c/clear-mind
Host=gopher.cic.net # DESCRIPTION: Electronic copies of a paper newsletter
(published 4 times/year) serving the Sakya Losal Choe Dzong Tibetan Buddhist
Center in Canberra, Australia. INQUIRIES: For more information about the Clear
Mind Newsletter or about Sakya Losal Choe Dzong center, please e-mail the
Editor, Lama CHOEDAK Yuthok . Postal address: 2 Sage Cl., Chisholm, Canberra
ACT 2905, Australia. ENTRY UPDATED: 20 January 1994 # # # NAME: Cybermonk
RESOURCE: E-mail questions-answers service LOCATION: Zen Mountain
Monastery/Dharma Communications, USA ACCESS: via e-mail message to
DESCRIPTION: We at Zen Mountain Monastery/Dharma Communications would like to
let all readers of the =>Universal Zendo mailing list know about our email
"Questions to Cybermonk offering. In response to questions regarding practice
posted here, we would like to extend an invitation to anyone interested to
email your questions to dharmacom@delphi.com - subject line: Question to
Cybermonk. All questions are as confidential as email allows and will be
answered by Senior monastics here at Zen Mountain Monastery. We welcome the
opportunity serve the Dharma through the internet. Prajna Paramita Muge Daido,
Abbott, Zen Mountain Monastery INQUIRIES: to find out more about Zen Mountain
Monastery please send your mailing address to the above email address or call
USA 914-688-2228 to request a program catalog. ENTRY UPDATED: 1 June 1994 # #
# NAME: DEFA - Dharma Electronic Files Archive RESOURCE: FTP archive LOCATION:
Berkeley, CA, USA ACCESS: Anon. FTP to ftp.netcom.com, sub-directory
/pub/dharma or via the following gopher pointer: # Name=DharmaNet Archives
(CICnet,USA) Type=1 Port=70 Path=1/Religious.Texts/DharmaNet Host=fir.cic.net
# INQUIRIES: Barry KAPKE , or Barry.Kapke@f33.n125.z1.fidonet.org DATE OF
CREATION: July 1993 COMMENTS: The Dharma Electronic File Archives (D.E.F.A.)
act as an electronic repository for Buddhist canonical texts, commentaries,
dharma talks, research papers, articles, bibliographies, newsletters, and
other materials relevant to the scope of Buddhism, inclusive of all schools.
These archives are intended to serve as a bridge between =>DharmaNet and
Internet. For FTP links, DEFA is located at sunsite.unc.edu in the
subdirectories: pub/academic/religious_studies/Buddhism/DEFA For WWW links the
URL is: http://sunsite.unc.edu/dharma/defa.html Barry KAPKE  writes: "DEFA can
also be accessed via gopher to sunsite.unc.edu but I'm not sure how to
describe the linkage. I haven't worked with gopher. those of you who are
mirroring defa or who have links to defa, please change from the netcom link
to the sunsite link. i will be removing the files that are online at netcom in
the next few days; they are already online at sunsite." ftp to:
sunsite.unc.edu login: anonymous | password: your_email_address | academic |
religious_studies | Buddhism / \ DEFA Tantric_Studies / | | / Iconography News
/ \-------------------------------------------------------------------- | | |
| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | Dharmanet Art | | Tibet | | | | | | |
Inbound Journals | | | | | | | | General / Resources WTN | | | | | Abhidhamma
--------------------- | | | | Vinaya / | | | | | | | | | Theravada / | | | | |
Gassho | | Zen | | | | | Inquiring Mind | Vayrayana Forest Sangha | | | Blind
Donkey Pureland Bhavana Society | Journal of Buddhist Ethics Clear Mind ENTRY
UPDATED: 5 September 1994 # # # NAME: DharmaNet International RESOURCE: BBS
LOCATION: Berkeley, CA, USA ACCESS: dial-up BBS, BODY DHARMA ONLINE,
1-510-836-4717; Also, anonymous FTP access via the =>DEFA anon. ftp archives
INQUIRIES: Barry KAPKE , or Barry.Kapke@f33.n125.z1.fidonet.org COMMENTS:
DharmaNet is a Fidonet-Technology Network seeking to provide a trans-national
web of Buddhist sites, a virtual online sangha. It seeks to disseminate
information through e-mail (netmail), newsgroups, text file libraries, and an
automated file distribution network, as well as to offer community and support
to its members and participants. The file DHARMA.ZIP contains various
informational documents about DharmaNet as well as a list of member sites. In
contact with the Australian =>BuddhaNet. Some of the DharmaNet materials are
now available on Internet via the =>DEFA anon. ftp archives. DharmaNet is also
accessible from the following gopher menu: # Name=DharmaNet Archives
(CICnet,USA) Type=1 Port=70 Path=1/Religious.Texts/DharmaNet Host=fir.cic.net
# ENTRY UPDATED: 25 July 1994 # # # NAME: (several) DharmaNet discussion
groups RESOURCE: Electronic Conference LOCATION: Berkeley, CA, USA ACCESS: for
each of the many groups see details below INQUIRIES: For information about
DharmaNet, locating DharmaNet sites, or joining DharmaNet, please contact
Barry KAPKE at BODY DHARMA ONLINE (data: 1-510-836-4717), or e-mail to
dharma@netcom.com NAME: AHIMSA (Practice/Philosophy of Non-Violence) DESC:
Discussion of the Buddhist principle & practice of Ahimsa, or non- injury to
sentient beings, whether by word, thought, or act. This area is also
appropriate to the discussion of vegetarianism as an ethical choice. MOD:
Barry Kapke, 1:125/33@fidonet.org OWNER: DharmaNet NAME: DHARMA (Buddhist
Philosophy & Practice) DESC: Buddhist theory, philosophy & practice. All
schools welcome. MOD: Barry Kapke, 1:125/33@fidonet.org OWNER: DharmaNet NAME:
DN_SERVE (Dharma Trading) DESC: A conference where network users can freely
trade in, and discuss the availability of, products and services specifically
related to spreading the Dharma. This is *NOT* a 'general' buy/sell echo. Mod:
Michael Wass, 3:711/918@fidonet.org OWNER: Moderator NAME: EMPTY_HAND
(Spirituality & Martial Arts) DESC: Discussion of theory and practice of
martial arts and their spirit of avoiding conflict and violence. All schools
welcome. MOD: G. Adam Stanislav, 1:129/39@fidonet.org OWNER: Moderator NAME:
HAIKU (Haiku Poetry & Prose) DESC: Creation, posting and discussion of varying
forms of poetry and prose of a disciplined and enlightened nature. Mainly
concentrating on Haiku, a Japanese form of structured poetry from the 16th
century, but open to other forms. Both original and quoted works are welcome.
MOD: Michael Wass, 3:711/918@fidonet.org OWNER: Moderator NAME: HUM_RACE (Race
& Buddhism) DESC: Discussion of racial issues and concerns in the context of
Buddhist teachings and practice; how to bring a Buddhist perspective to anti-
racism and ethnic diversity work at an individual, community, and societal
level; and how to address and work to eliminate racism in the sangha. MOD:
Open OWNER: DharmaNet NAME: MEDITATION (Meditation) DESC: Discussion relating
to the practice, techniques, and experience of meditation. Helpful advice for
the neophyte. MOD: G. Adam Stanislav, 1:129/39@fidonet.org OWNER: DharmaNet
NAME: PEACEWORK (Engaged Buddhism) DESC: Discussion of ethics and social
responsibility from a Buddhist perspective and an exploration of the
philosophy and practice of an "engaged", or socially activist, Buddhism. MOD:
Barry Kapke, 1:125/33@fidonet.org OWNER: DharmaNet NAME: PURELAND (Pure Land
Buddhism) DESC: Discussion relating to the practice, teachers and teachings of
the Pure Land traditions of Buddhism. MOD: Open OWNER: DharmaNet NAME: SANGHA
(Int'l Dharma Events & Community Listings) DESC: Buddhist "calendar." National
listing of classes, retreats, dharma events, sitting groups, visiting
teachers, etc. MOD: Barry Kapke, 1:125/33@fidonet.org OWNER: DharmaNet NAME:
SHILA (Buddhist Ethics) DESC: Discussion of Buddhist ethical precepts that
form the foundation for the conduct of monks, nuns, and laypersons. This echo
provides a place for grappling with difficult moral and practical questions
within the support of an online sangha. MOD: Barry Kapke, 1:125/33@fidonet.org
OWNER: DharmaNet NAME: THERAVADA (Theravada Buddhism) DESC: Discussion
relating to the practice, teachers and teachings of the Theravada traditions
of Buddhism. MOD: John Bullitt, 96:903/1@dharmanet OWNER: DharmaNet NAME:
TIBET_NEWS (Tibet News & Culture) DESC: Discussion of issues and events
relating to Tibetan culture, history, and social/political developments.
CanTibNet Newsletter. The engagement of Buddhist values in the struggle for
human rights and political independence is also explored, although the
companion echo VAJRAYANA is more appropriate to the discussion of Tibetan
Buddhism and its practice. MOD: Barry Kapke, 1:125/33@fidonet.org OWNER:
DharmaNet NAME: VAJRAYANA (Vajrayana Buddhism) Discussion relating to the
practice, teachers and teachings of the Vajrayana traditions of Buddhism. MOD:
Open OWNER: DharmaNet NAME: VINAYA (Monastic Community) DESC: Discussion of
rules and regulations governing the communal life of Buddhist monks and nuns.
MOD: Open OWNER: DharmaNet NAME: YEN_KI (Buddhism & American Culture) DESC:
Discussion relating to Buddhism from an American perspective and the everyday
life in America from a Buddhist perspective. Participants could talk just
about anything that is on their minds from baseball to abortion to is Jesus a
bodhisattva to movies to crime to whatever, and see how being a Buddhist helps
them deal with that whatever. MOD: G. Adam Stanislav, 1:129/39@fidonet.org
OWNER: Moderator NAME: ZEN (Zen Buddhism) DESC: Discussion relating to the
practice, teachers and teachings of Zen Buddhism. All schools of Zen Buddhism
are welcome. MOD: Open Forum OWNER: DharmaNet ENTRY UPDATED: 17 January 1994 #
# # NAME: Dharma-Talk RESOURCE: Electronic-forum LOCATION: USA ACCESS:
Exchanges are distributed daily to the members via the e-mail. INQUIRIES: Than
Vo  Fax: +61-2-716-8644, Voice: +61-2-797-6999; or Tin Le  INTERNET ADDRESS:
dharma-talk@saigon.com COMMENTS: As part of our efforts to establish world-
wide channels of communication for the Buddhist community, the mailing list
"dharma-talk" has been created at Saigon.COM. This list is an international
forum for discussions, exchanges of information regarding Buddhism and for
announcements of Buddhist related events. List members may or may not be of
Buddhist faith. "This is an international forum so messages may be in
languages other than English. So, in order to help the reader to select
relevant messages, your message header (Subject) should be in English. If the
message content is other than English then your message header should be
prefixed by an identifier indicating the language used in the content. For
example, the email subject may be: [LAO] Vesak events in Laos... [THAI] Royal
retreat in Bangkok... [TIBET] Holy Dalai Lama visiting ... [VN] Buddhist monks
arrested in Vietnam... Prince Charles is a vegetarian... Buddhist scholars in
US universities..." The electronic forum can be joined by sending an e-mail
message "subscribe dharma-talk" to (Internet): majordomo@saigon.com ENTRY
UPDATED: 14 October 1994 # # # NAME: EBA - Electronic Buddhist Archives
RESOURCE: FTP archive LOCATION: Coombspapers Soc. Sci. Research Data Bank,
Aust. National Univ., Canberra, Australia ACCESS: via anonymous ftp to
coombs.anu.edu.au (subdirectory coombspapers/otherarchives). Also available
via also via =>Buddhist Studies Facility on COOMBSQUEST gopher
(coombs.anu.edu.au 150.203.76.2 or, alternatively, cheops.anu.edu.au
150.203.76.24 INQUIRIES: Dr T.Mathew CIOLEK e-mail to:
tmciolek@coombs.anu.edu.au DATE OF CREATION: December 1991 COMMENTS: users are
invited to deposit with this Archive high quality English language documents
dealing with Buddhist studies/issues (esp. Zen and Tibetan) (both historical
and present). DIRECTORY STRUCTURE [14 July 1994] : DIRECTORY:
/otherarchives/electronic-buddhist-archives/ Subdir: /buddhism-
general/bibliographies/ Subdir: /buddhism-general/directories/ Subdir:
/buddhism-general/e-resources/ Subdir: /buddhism-general/e-journals/aar-
newsletter/ Subdir: /buddhism-general/e-journals/gassho-journal/ Subdir:
/buddhism-general/e-texts/information/ Subdir: /buddhism-
general/e-texts/sutras-originals/ Subdir: /buddhism-general/e-texts/sutras-
translations/ Subdir: /buddhism-general/periodicals-info/ Subdir: /buddhism-
general/research/ Subdir: /buddhism-general/theses-abstracts/ Subdir:
/buddhism-theravada/teachings/ Subdir: /buddhism-tibetan/clear-mind-nwsltr/
Subdir: /buddhism-tibetan/liturgy/ Subdir: /buddhism-tibetan/poetry/ Subdir:
/buddhism-tibetan/research/ Subdir: /buddhism-tibetan/sakya-teachings/ Subdir:
/buddhism-vajrayana/teachings/ Subdir: /buddhism-vietnamese/ Subdir:
/buddhism-zen/information/ Subdir: /buddhism-zen/information/zen-groups/
Subdir: /buddhism-zen/poetry/australia/ Subdir: /buddhism-zen/poetry/china/
Subdir: /buddhism-zen/poetry/japan/ Subdir: /buddhism-zen/poetry/korea/
Subdir: /buddhism-zen/poetry/new-zealand/ Subdir: /buddhism-zen/poetry/usa/
Subdir: /buddhism-zen/poetry/vietnam/ Subdir: /buddhism-zen/research/ Subdir:
/buddhism-zen/ritual/diamond-sangha/current-texts/ Subdir: /buddhism-
zen/ritual/diamond-sangha/old-texts/ Subdir: /buddhism-zen/ritual/sw-chogye-
zen-center/ Subdir: /buddhism-zen/teachings/aitken-robert Subdir: /buddhism-
zen/teachings/beck-joko Subdir: /buddhism-zen/teachings/bolleter-ross Subdir:
/buddhism-zen/teachings/echard-musgrave Subdir: /buddhism-zen/teachings/kyong-
ho Subdir: /buddhism-zen/teachings/laity-annabel Subdir: /buddhism-
zen/teachings/maezumi-taizan Subdir: /buddhism-zen/teachings/nhat-hahn Subdir:
/buddhism-zen/teachings/rand-yvonne Subdir: /buddhism-zen/teachings/samy-ama
Subdir: /buddhism-zen/teachings/subhana-barzaghi Subdir: /buddhism-
zen/teachings/tarrant-john Subdir: /buddhism-zen/teachings/yamada-koun Subdir:
/buddhism-zen/teachings/yasutani-hakuun Also, the Archives contain several
files in the following sub-directories of the other-asian-religions section
Subdir: /other-asian-religions/hassidism/ Subdir: /other-asian-
religions/hinduism/ Subdir: /other-asian-religions/shamanism/ Subdir: /other-
asian-religions/sufism/ Subdir: /other-asian-religions/taoism/ Subdir: /other-
asian-religions/taoism/information/ Subdir: /other-asian-religions/taoism/ttc-
translations/ Subdir: /other-asian-religions/taoism/zen-taoism-teachings/
ENTRY UPDATED: 18 July 1994 # # # NAME: EBTI - Electronic Buddhist Text
Initiative RESOURCE: Research group LOCATION: Dept.of East Asian Languages,
Univ.of California, Berkeley, USA ACCESS: ? INQUIRIES: Lewis LANCASTER ; FAX
(510) 642-603; Tel (510) 642-3485 COMMENTS: L. Lancaster is the Chair of the
newly formed Electronic Publications Committee for the American Academy of
Religion. The EBTI group (formed April 26, 1993) is an association of about 25
groups involved in the input of Buddhist materials. The current Chair of the
advisory board is L. Lancaster and Urs App of the =>International Research
Institute for Zen Buddhism is the coordinator. In summer 1993, a team from the
EBTI made a tour of input operations in Taiwan, Hong Kong, Bangkok, Shanghai,
Beijing, Seoul. EBTI has also set up seminars in several of these cities to
help people with the coding and input problems. ENTRY UPDATED: 5 November 1993
# # # NAME: EMPTINESS RESOURCE: Electronic-forum LOCATION: USA ACCESS:
Exchanges are distributed to the members via the e-mail. INQUIRIES: Dr Kent
D.Palmer  COMMENTS: Forum on Buddhist Philosophy. Anything to do with the
philosophy of Buddhism or how that philosophy relates to other philosophies
are fair game. Administrative matters should be sent to
thinknet@world.std.com. The group can be joined by sending the following
message to majordomo@world.std.com: subscribe EMPTINESS yourfullname
userid@internet.address EXCHANGES should be directed to:
emptiness@world.std.com In early Feb 94 there 123 subscribers to the list
COMMENTS2: majordomo@world.std.com is a platform for several other
philosophical forums. suggestions for creation of new specialist lists are
accepted. A Computer Bulletin Board System (THINKNET BBS) is also associated
with these lists supporting more general discussion and storing the backlog.
To access the BBS call 714-638-0876. QWK mail readers are supported. Thinknet
BBS is a member of DialogNet which is a network of Philosophy oriented BBS
systems. ENTRY UPDATED: 25 July 1994 # # # NAME: GASSHO RESOURCE: E-journal
ISSN #: 1072-2971 DESCRIPTION: An electronic journal serving the global
Buddhist community. It is intended to promote and support dialogue between
monks, nuns, lay teachers, lay practitioners, scholars, and students. It is
open to all schools and traditions of Buddhism. TO SUBSCRIBE: Send e-mail to
dharma@netcom.com stating that you would like to subscribe to GASSHO. This is
NOT a Listserv. SUBMISSIONS: Submissions should be e-mailed to
dharma@netcom.com specifying that it is intended for consideration to GASSHO.
The file 'writers-guide' may be retrieved by anonymous ftp from the site
FTP.NETCOM.COM in the subdirectory /pub/dharma/Gassho. RELATED LIST: GASSHO is
associated with =>DharmaNet International, a Fidonet-technology network of
Buddhist BBSs. DharmaNet provides numerous newsgroups of related interest, but
they are not presently accessible via Internet. PERIODICITY: Bi-monthly (every
two months). BACK ISSUES: Back issues will be available by anonymous ftp to
the. site FTP.NETCOM.COM in the subdirectory /pub/dharma/Gassho. Back issues
are also available by anonymous ftp and/or COOMBSQUEST gopher at
COOMBS.ANU.EDU.AU (=>Electronic Buddhist Archives & =>Buddhist Studies
Facility). The Journal is also accessible from the following gopher menu: #
Name=GASSHO - Electronic Jrnl of DharmaNet Intl (CICnet,USA) Type=1 Port=70
Path=1/Religious.Texts/DharmaNet/Gassho Host=fir.cic.net # CONTACT: For more
information about GASSHO or about DharmaNet Int'l, please e-mail Barry KAPKE
(dharma@netcom.com). Postal address: P.O. Box 4951, Berkeley CA 94704-4951
USA. COMMENTS: ENTRY UPDATED: 14 July 1994 # # # NAME: INSIGHT RESOURCE:
Electronic-forum LOCATION: USA INQUIRIES: ?? TO SUBSCRIBE: Send a message to
"majordomo@pioneer.ci.net". In the body of the message, put the command
"subscribe insight" (leave out the quotes). TO UNSUBSCRIBE: Send a message to
"majordomo@pioneer.ci.net". In the body of the message, put the command
"unsubscribe insight" (leave out the quotes). TO POST messages to the list:
Address your message to "insight@pioneer.ci.net". COMMENTS: ENTRY UPDATED: 16
August 1994 # # # NAME: International Research Institute for Zen Buddhism
RESOURCE: Research group LOCATION: Hanazono University, Kyoto, Japan
INQUIRIES: Dr Urs APP (fax +81-75-811-9664) INTERNET ADDRESS: Urs App
Christian Wittern  BITNET ADDRESS: D54682@JPNKUDPC TEL (075) 811 5181 (ext
280) FAX (075) 811 9664 NOTES: e-mail sent from Internet has occasional
problems with reaching the IRIZB. The Institute publishes a newsletter (no 3
in July 1993) entitled "The Electronic Bodhidharma" dedicated to the issued of
computerised input, storage, retrieval and analyses of texts in the Asian &
English languages. Since 1993 joint research projects with the =>EBTI group.
ENTRY UPDATED: 16 August 1994 # # # NAME: JBE - Journal of Buddhist Ethics
RESOURCE: E-journal LOCATION: USA, UK, Australia INQUIRIES: Dr. Wayne R.Husted
or Dr Damien Keown  COMMENTS: Material published by the Journal of Buddhist
Ethics may be read and retrieved via the World Wide Web, Gopher, or anonymous
FTP. 1) WORLD WIDE WEB ACCESS A hypertext version is available via the
following URL's: http://www.cac.psu.edu/jbe/jbe.html http://www.gold.ac.uk/jbe
2) GOPHER ACCESS An ASCII text version is available from Penn State
University's Gopher: Type: 1 Host: ftp.cac.psu.edu Port: 70 Selector: 1/jbe or
Goldsmiths' Gopher: Type: 1 Host: scorpio.gold.ac.uk Port: 70 Selector: 1/jbe
or Coombsquest Gopher: Type: 1 Host: cis.anu.edu.au Port: 70 Selector:
ftp:coombs.anu.edu.au@/coombspapers/otherarchives/ electronic-buddhist-
archives/buddhism-general/e-journals/jbe/ (please note misleading wrap-around
in the path listed above) 3) ANONYMOUS FTP ACCESS: An ASCII text version is
available from * USA site: ftp.cac.psu.edu in the directory /pub/jbe or * UK
site: ftp.gold.ac.uk in the directory /pub/jbe * AUSTRALIA site:
coombs.anu.edu.au in the directory /coombspapers/otherarchives/electronic-
buddhist-archives/buddhism-general/ e-journals/jbe (please note misleading
wrap-around in the path listed above) If you have difficulty in obtaining any
item please contact the Journal's Technical Editor Dr. Wayne R.Husted . ENTRY
UPDATED: 11 November 1994 # # # NAME: Karma Kagyu Buddhist Network (KKBN)
RESOURCE: WWW pages LOCATION: San Francisco, USA / Viernheim, GERMANY ACCESS:
http://pobox.com/~kkbn INQUIRIES: Richard Weber-Laux (KKBN), kkbn@pobox.com
DATE OF CREATION: June 1995 COMMENTS: The Karma Kagyu Buddhist Network (KKBN)
is an international computer network which is operated by volunteer
coordinators in order to enable and enhance communication between
organizations, centers, groups and individuals. The KKBN provides information
about the Karma Kagyu tradition of Tibetan Buddhism, supports communication
among interested parties and introduces a worldwide online Sangha. The KKBN
exists under the spiritual guidance of the 17th Karmapa, Thaye Dorje, and is
directed by Lama Ole Nydahl. Contains information about centers, meditations,
teachings, books, etc. Excerpts of the magazine "Kagyu Life" are given as well
as special topics like "Kids and Buddhism". ENTRY UPDATED: 05 January 1996 # #
# NAME: Mount Kailas RESOURCE: Bulletin Board (BBS) LOCATION: Cambridge, MA,
USA INQUIRIES: ??? COMMENTS: "Mount Kailas BBS, Cambridge, MA 617-252-9988
Virtual Dharma Center featuring a calendar of teachings and events from the
Buddhist Centers in the New England Area." They have no FTP, kailas.com has an
MX record pointing to mail.holonet.net, altmail.holonet.net,
guardian.holonet.net Mt. Kailas BBS a commercial BBS service.The data # is
1-617-252-9988 (modem settings: 8N1). The voice # is 1-508-921-0482. There is
a write-up about it in the Summer 1994 Supplement of //Snow Lion//. ENTRY
UPDATED: 30 September 1994 # # # NAME: NCF (Ottawa) Special Interest Group in
Buddhism RESOURCE: Community group LOCATION: Ottawa, Canada INQUIRIES: Andre'
Vellino, vellino@bnr.ca, (613)763-7514, fax (613)763-4222 Bell-Northern
Research, Box 3511, Station C, Ottawa, CANADA K1Y 4H7 COMMENTS: publishes a
WWW page with an overview of Theravada teachings :
http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/freenet/rootdir/menus/sigs/
religion/buddhism/introduction/home.html ENTRY UPDATED: 30 September 1994 # #
# NAME: Siam Edition of the Pali Canon (volumes 1-45) RESOURCE: CD-ROM
LOCATION: n/a INQUIRIES: e-mail to: scholars@emoryu1.cc.emory.edu, with the
following notation: Attention: Harry Gilmer RE: Pali CD ROM COMMENTS: The
American Academy of Religion will be the distributor, outside of Thailand, of
the Siam Edition of the Pali Canon (volumes 1-45) on CD-ROM. Text is in Thai
and Romanized Pali. This monumental work was accomplished at Thailand's
Mahidol University Computing Center and includes BUDSIR (Buddhist Scriptures
Information Retrieval) IV software for PC and Macintosh users. The BUDSIR IV
edition is just now being pressed into CD-ROM and should be ready for
distribution. The cost for individuals and Buddhist organizations (eg.,
temples, monasteries, etc) is $299 (tax and shipping not included) and $599
for institutions with multiple users. ENTRY UPDATED: 16 August 1994 # # #
NAME: RELIGION - Religions Discussion Group RESOURCE: Electronic-forum
LOCATION: Harvard Center for the Study of World Religions, USA ACCESS: The
LISTSERV list RELIGION will only allow subscribers access to its files.
Subsciption is open to all by sending the command SUBSCRIBE RELIGION your name
[eg. subscribe religion A.B. Charles ] to subscription address (see below)
INQUIRIES: Moderator - Tim BRYSON tbry@harvarda.harvard.edu INTERNET
Subscription Address: listserv@harvarda.harvard.edu BITNET Subscription
Address: listserv@harvarda INTERNET Mailing Address:
religion@harvarda.harvard.edu BITNET Mailing Address: religion@harvarda
COMMENTS: RELIGION is a LISTSERV list for the scholarly discussion of
religions. It is sponsored by the Harvard Center for the Study of World
Religions. Unlike lists with similar names, RELIGION does not deal with
matters of personal faith or theology. Rather, it's aim is to encourage
discussion of the historical and comparative study and teaching of religions.
Relevant approaches include history, sociology, psychology, philosophy,
literary criticism, and anthropology. Relevant issues include methodology in
the study and teaching of religions; comparative themes such as myth, ritual,
mysticism, community, and inter-religious contact; and issues specific to
particular traditions. Some of the materials available from the listserv:
Carpenter, David. Syllabus from the seminar, Buddhism. (1991). Available from
RELIGION listserv as BUDDHSM2 SYLLABUS. Dalton, James S. Syllabus from the
seminar, Religious Tradition: A Study of Buddhism. (1991). Available from
RELIGION listserv BUDDHISM SYLLABUS. Hori, G. Victor Sogen. Syllabus to the
seminar, Zen Buddhism. (1992). Available from RELIGION listserv ZEN SYLLABUS.
Queen, Christopher. Syllabus from the seminar, Buddhism in America. (1992).
Available from RELIGION listserv BUDDAMER SYLLABUS. Sperling, Elliot. Syllabus
from the seminar, Tibetan Religions. (1993). Available from RELIGION listserv
TIBET SYLLABUS. ENTRY UPDATED: 5 November 1993 # # # NAME: Special Interest
Group in Buddhism RESOURCE: WWW page

* [ Special Interest Group in Buddhism ](http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/freenet/rootdir/menus/sigs/religion/buddhism/introduction/home.html) (NCF,Ottawa,Canada) # # # NAME: Tantric-News RESOURCE: WAIS database LOCATION: University of North California, USA ACCESS: via the standard WAIS software and through the =>Buddhist Studies Facility on COOMBSQUEST gopher (coombs.anu.edu.au and cheops.anu.edu.au) INQUIRIES: James H. Sanford, Department of Religious Studies, 101 Saunders Hall, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, N. C. 27514 Charles Orzech  Department of Religious Studies, 200 Foust Hall, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, N.C. 27401 DATE OF CREATION: 10 July 1993 COMMENTS: According to the compilers the database should deal "with the Hindu tantra, Indian Buddhist tantra, the Bauls, any siddhas, Tibetan Buddhism, Sahajiya, golden pill Taoism, Chen-yen, Shingon, and Taimitsu Buddhism. We only leave Mongolian Buddhism, Bengali Sufism, and Tangut Manicheaism off the initial list becasue we are too ignorant to make a judgement as to the fit and/or bare existence of same. Possibly we should consider serious work on Western alchemy as well." ENTRY UPDATED: 18 November 1993 # # # NAME: STS NEWS - Tantric Studies Newsletter RESOURCE: E-journal LOCATION: University of North California, USA ACCESS: via the anon. ftp to calypso.oit.unc.edu, subdir: pub/academic/religious_studies/Buddhism/Tantric_Studies/Newsletter INQUIRIES: James H. Sanford, Department of Religious Studies, 101 Saunders Hall, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, N. C. 27514 Charles Orzech  Department of Religious Studies, 200 Foust Hall, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, N.C. 27401 DATE OF CREATION: ??? COMMENTS: According to the editors the newsletter will deal "with the Hindu tantra, Indian Buddhist tantra, the Bauls, any siddhas, Tibetan Buddhism, Sahajiya, golden pill Taoism, Chen-yen, Shingon, and Taimitsu Buddhism. We only leave Mongolian Buddhism, Bengali Sufism, and Tangut Manicheaism off the initial list becasue we are too ignorant to make a judgement as to the fit and/or bare existence of same. Possibly we should consider serious work on Western alchemy as well." ENTRY UPDATED: 25 July 1994 # # # NAME: TIGER TEAM BUDDHIST INFORMATION NETWORK RESOURCE: BBS LOCATION: Berkeley, California, USA ACCESS: Data communications is: 510/268-0102. Multiple phone lines available. INQUIRIES: e-mail to: info@tigerteam.org INTERNET ADDRESS: Gary RAY (Founder, Bay Buddhist Net), Gary.Ray@tigerteam.org COMMENTS: It is an Online Buddhist Information Service. Access to the resource is free (Donors of data receive increased access). Disseminates information on various forms of Buddhism: * Free internet e-mail * Hooked to the several Buddhism/Taoism listservs * Receives Usenet SOC.RELIGION.EASTERN and ALT.MEDITATION newsgroups, as well as various Asian culture groups. * Active =>DharmaNet member - Home of ZEN BUDDHISM, SCHOLARS BUDDHISM, WOMEN & BUDDHISM conferences and BAY BUDDHIST NET * Local Discussion groups include the BUDDHIST PEACE FELLOWSHIP, ON-DHARMA (Ask a bhikshu or bhikshuni about spiritual practice), and the KARMA KLUB, a Buddhist "lounge." BUDDHIST MATERIALS: * Distributor of ASIAN CLASSIC INPUT PROJECT materials * Distributor of DHARMA REALM BUDDHIST ASSOCIATION sutras, commentaries and Dharma talks. * Complete library of the materials from the COOMBSPAPERS' =>Electronic Buddhist Archives. * Large collection of Buddhist artwork, including rare Tibetan block prints and full color professionally scanned items. Also contains sound files, including chanting monks, the Dalai Lama and Thich Nhat Hanh. * Large collection of Asian language tutorials, word processors and dictionaries. Home of "Tibetan (and Pali) Flashcards for Windows." * Distributor of CWP - Chinese Word Processor and KAPIAN - Chinese Flash Cards, as well as Reality Software religious studies programs. NEARBY FUTURE PLANS: * PALI CANON on CD-ROM available for online searches by June 1994. * Direct connection to the Internet by January, 1995. ENTRY UPDATED: 5 November 1993 # # # NAME: Universal Zendo RESOURCE: Electronic-forum LOCATION: Linkoeping, Sweden ACCESS: Exchanges are distributed to the members via the e-mail. INQUIRIES: Mikael CARDELL  INTERNET ADDRESS: zendo@lysator.liu.se COMMENTS: This list was started as a reaction against more scholarly lists like =>BUDDHA-L and is supposed to deal with *applied* Zen Buddhism \--- the everyday practice. The list is open for anyone who wants to discuss religious practice even though the majority of the list subscribers are Zen Buddhists. The group can be joined by sending an e-mail message "subscribe zendo 'firstname' 'lastname' to (Internet): zendo-request@lysator.liu.se. ENTRY UPDATED: 9 November 1993 # # # NAME: ZEN RESOURCE: Electronic-forum LOCATION: USA ACCESS: Exchanges are distributed to the members via the e-mail. INQUIRIES: Dr Kent D.Palmer  COMMENTS: Forum on Zen Buddhism.To find out how the group can be joined by sending the following "help" to listserv@apeiron.uucp.netcom.com: EXCHANGES should be directed to: zen@apeiron.uucp.netcom.com COMMENTS2: listserv@apeiron.uucp.netcom.com (majordomo@world.std.com, until 25 Nov 94) is a platform for several other philosophical forums. Suggestions for creation of new specialist lists are accepted. A Computer Bulletin Board System (THINKNET BBS) is also associated with these lists supporting more general discussion and storing the backlog. To access the BBS call 714-638-0876. QWK mail readers are supported. Thinknet BBS is a member of DialogNet which is a network of Philosophy oriented BBS systems. ENTRY UPDATED: 14 November 1994 # # # NAME: ZenBuddhism-L RESOURCE: Electronic-forum LOCATION: Australian National Univ., Canberra, Australia ACCESS: Exchanges are distributed daily to the members via the e-mail. The proceedings are are automatically archived. They are retrievable world-wide via the =>ANU-ZenBuddhism-L standard WAIS software and through the =>Buddhist Studies Facility on COOMBSQUEST gopher (coombs.anu.edu.au and cheops.anu.edu.au) INQUIRIES: Dr. T.Matthew CIOLEK  INTERNET ADDRESS: zenbuddhism-l@coombs.anu.edu.au COMMENTS: Zen Buddhism Studies and Practice discussion group can be joined by sending an e-mail message "subscribe zenbuddhism-l your e-mail address" [ eg: subscribe zenbuddhism-l xyz@abacus.computer.ca ] to (Internet): majordomo@coombs.anu.edu.au. ENTRY UPDATED: 14 July 1994 # # # NAME: 5_RINGS PODnet discussion group RESOURCE: Electronic Conference LOCATION: California, USA ACCESS: see details below INQUIRIES: For information about PODnet, locating PODnet sites, or joining PODnet, please contact Chuck HAYNES at CASA DE LA LUZ (data: 1-1-512-219-9853). NAME: 5_RINGS (Five Rings) DESC: Named "5_RINGS" after the Musashi book of the same name, the original intent of this conference was to allow a forum for discussion about using "Strategy" to overcome the problems of daily living. While this is STILL part of what the conference is about, an

