**[Samford](http://www.samford.edu)  |  [Arts &
Sciences](http://www.samford.edu/schools/artsci/cover.html)  |
[History](http://www.samford.edu/schools/artsci/history/index.html)  |
[Mullins](http://www.samford.edu/schools/artsci/history/faculty/bhmullin/index.html)**

> **The West in Global Perspective**  
> **History 200-01 MWF 8:00-9:05 a.m.**  
> **Spring Term 2001**

>

> **Professor Betty Mullins**  
> **Office Hours: DBH 209**  
> **Phone: 726-2591**  
> **E-mail:[bhmullin@samford.edu](mailto:bhmullin@samford.edu)**  
> **Office Hours: By Appointment**

>

> **Course Description:**  
>  This course will examine the development of Western Civilization since 1500
in a global context. It will explore the political, social, economic, and
scientific aspects of Western Civilization and its impact on and interaction
with the non-Western World. A variety of sources will be used as we pursue our
study. For example: A basic text, biographies, a novel, and **** a packet of
readings which will be placed on reserve in the library for you. This packet
will include some writings of Yamaga Soko, Lenin, Gandhi, Mao Zedong, Bernt
Engelmann, and Hitler. Additionally, it will include a Far Eastern policy
statement produced by Japan in the early 1940s and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights which was approved by the United Nations in 1948\.
Periodically handouts of other relevant sources will be provided in class.

>

> The format of this course will consist of lectures, class discussions, some
of which will be student-led, group work, in-class and out-of-class writing
assignments, and a final major research project which will focus on
International tension and Global conflicts in the post World War II Era. This
project will include a class presentation. Written instructions for this
assignment will be provided. You will also have mid-term and final exams.
Exams will consist of essay topics and short answer questions.

>

> **Expectations and Requirements:**  
>  It is expected that you will make every effort to be in class each day and
that you will be prepared for class by having read any assignments you have
been given for that day. After 6 cuts you may be given a grade of FA.
Moreover, it is expected that work assigned in advance will be turned in on
time. Your grade will be lowered a letter grade for each day an assignment is
late.

>

> Participation in class discussions is an important aspect of this course.
Participating in and leading class discussions, and working on group
assignments will enable you to clarify your views and enhance your
understanding of the sources we will be studying.

>

> **Evaluation:**  
>  *In-class writing assignments and group work: 20-30 points  
> *Out of class writing assignments: 30-50 points  
> *Class participation: 15 points  
> *Mid-Term Exam: 50 points  
> *Research Project and Presentation: 100 points  
> *Final Exam: 100 points

  
**Grading Scale:** A | 93-100 | C | 73-77  
---|---|---|---  
A- | 90-92 | C- | 70-72  
B+ | 88-89 | D+ | 68-69  
B | 83-87 | D | 63-67  
B- | 80-82 | D- | 60-62  
C+ | 78-79 | F | 59 and below  
  
**Required Texts for This Class:**  
Thomas F.X Noble, et.al, _Western Civilization_ : _The Continuing Experiment_
(Volume II: Since 1560) Brief Edition  
Erich Maria Remarque, _All Quiet on the Western Front_  
Elie Wiesel, _Night_  
Elie Wiesel, _Dawn_  
Packet of Readings on reserve in Davis Library

Please consult the class calendar in this syllabus for reading assignments.
This will insure that you have time to read them by the day they are assigned.  
    
    
  

**CLASS CALENDAR** 31 | January | Introduction to Course, discuss and explain
syllabus, answer questions regarding course  
---|---|---  
2 | February | Lecture: Renaissance and Reformation: Read Luther's _Ninety-
five Theses_ (available on the web)  
  |   | Read: Noble: p. 331-357  
  |   | **RELIGIOUS WARS, SOCIETY, AND CULTURE**  
5  | February | Topics: 1) Religious wars and consolidation of royal authority
in France

2) Religious disputes in England during the reign of Queen Elizabeth I

Read: Noble, p. 331-346  
7 | February | Topic: The Thirty Years' War and Its Effect

Read: Noble, p. 347-351  
9  | February | Topic: Society and Culture in the late sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries.

Read: p. 353-356 and Soko document in packet on reserve  
  |   | Read: Noble, p. 359-384  
  |   |  
  |   | **ABSOLUTISM, CIVIL WAR, REVOLUTION, RESTORATION, COLONIZATION**  
12 | February | Topic: The Age of Louis XIV

Read: Noble, p. 359-366  
14 | February | Topic: English Civil War, Cromwell and the Interregnum, The
Restoration, The Glorious Revolution

Documents to be considered: Petition of Right, Bill of Rights,

Act of Settlement, Read Noble, p. 367-371  
16 | February | Topic: Overseas Empires and Colonization,

Read Noble, p. 376-380; documents in Noble p. 379, 405, 431, 461  
  |   | Read: Noble, p. 438-461  
  |   | **THE FRENCH REVOLUTION AND ITS IMPACT**  
19 | February | Topic: Causes and Beginnings of Revolution in France

Read: Noble, p. 439-452  
21 | February | Topic: The Age of Napoleon

Read Noble, p. 452-457  
23 | February | Topic: The Impact of the Revolution on Europe and the World

Read Noble, p. 459-61 & 464-67  
  |   | Read: Noble, 492-508; 521-528; 575-583 & documents p. 535 & 581  
  |   | **INDUSTRIALIZATION, NATIONALISM, IMPERIALISM**  
26  | February | Topic: Industrialization

Read: Noble, p. 492-508  
28 | February | Topic: Nationalism

Read: Noble, p. 521-529  
2 | March | Topic: Imperialism

Read: Noble, p. 575-582

Handout: Document on Imperialism  
  |   | Read: Noble, p. 597-621; Remarque; Packet on reserve: Lenin and Mao  
  |   | **THE GREAT WAR AND ITS AFTERMATH**  
5 | March | Topic: Causes and Incidents leading to Total War

Read: Noble, p. 597-608 & 613-616  
7 | March | Topic: Remarque: The face of war from a military perspective

General Discussion/Assignments  
9 | March | Topic: Remarque continued

In-class group work  
12 | March | Topic: The Peace Settlement and its Consequences

Read: Noble, p. 616-621 and excerpts from the Treaty of Versailles/the
restructuring of Europe  
14 | March | Topic: The Bolshevik Revolution

Read: Noble, p.609-613 & Lenin and Mao  
  |   | Read: Noble, p. 625-651; Packet on reserve: Excerpt from _Mein Kampf_
and document on Japanese Imperialism  
  |   | **BETWEEN THE WARS**  
16 | March | Topic: the Economy and Worldwide Depression

Read: Noble, p. 625-632  
19 | March | Review for Mid-Term Exam  
21 | March | **MID-TERM EXAM**  
23 | March | Topic: Stalin and the Soviet Union, 1924-1933

Read: Noble, p. 632-637  
  |   | Read: Noble, p. 654-678 & Weisel's _Night_ and _Dawn_  
26-30 | March | **SPRING HOLIDAYS**  
2 | April | Lecture: the Rise of Fascism and Nazism in Italy and Germany in
the 1920s & 30s  
  |   | **THE WORLD WAR II YEARS**  
4 | April | Topic: The Response of the West to Aggression

Read: Noble, p. 655-660  
6 | April | Topic: The Holocaust: The face of war from a civilian perspective

Read: Weisel's _Night_ (all)  
9 | April | Topic: The Holocaust continued

Read: Weisel's _Dawn_ (all)  
11 | April | Topic: A Global War

Read: Noble, p. 661-673  
13 | April | Topic: Allied Victories in the West and East

Read: Noble, p. 674-678  
16 | April | **EASTER HOLIDAY**  
18 | April | Lecture: The Post War World and the Defeated Axis Powers  
20 | April | Explanation of Research Assignment: This assignment will focus on
the post-war period from the late 1940s through the 1980s and the
International Crises that developed between the Western Democracies, the
Soviet Union and its satellite countries, North Korea, China, and Viet Nam.
Further written instruction will be given.  
23 | April | Individual conference with professor to discuss research topic  
25 | April | Lecture: The Cold War and Its Causes  
27 | April | Class will not meet; use time for research  
30 | April | Lecture: Post World War II Nationalism and the Loss of Empire  
2 | May | Topic: The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (Reserve Packet)  
4-14 | May | Presentation of Research Projects  
16 | May | Last Day of Class-----Review for Final  
17 | May | Study Day  
18 | May | Final Exam  
  |   | ***Please Note: From time to time out of class writing assignments
will be made and in-class writing assignments and quizzes will be given on the
various reading assignments listed in the syllabus.  
  
> Page created by [Susan Murphy](mailto:swmurphy@samford.edu)  
> 1/18/01

