SAMPLE SYLLABUS

Honors 202 (004)

Humanities: Middle Ages, Renaissance, Enlightenment

11:00-11:50 MWF

Room BB-102

Instructor: Daniel Goffman

Office: BB 212; Phone: 285-8712; E-Mail: 00dsgoffman

Office Hours: M 8:00-9:00 and 1:00-1:50, Th 10:00-12:00, and by appointment

**

Required Texts

**

Daniel Defoe, _A Journal of the Plague Year

_

Niccolo Machiavelli, _The Discourses

_

Maynard Mack, _et al_., _The Norton Anthology of World Masterpieces

_

William Shakespeare, _Coriolanus

_

William Shakespeare, _Troilus and Cressida

_

Voltaire, _Candide, Zadig, and Selected Stories

_

Several handouts

**

Course Description and Purpose

**

The Humanities courses (Honors 201, 202) fulfill the six-credit hour
requirement in Humanities and Fine Arts. Together with 203, they cover some of
the major ideas, philosophies, myths, and histories of western civilization.
This second course (202) emphasizes the central Mediterranean and Atlantic
seaboard during the fourteenth through the eighteenth centuries. We also will
read some comparative pieces from Japan and the Middle East. In all three
courses we are seeking to define, find, and discuss the illusive truths,
attitudes, and mores that constitute the fundamental building blocks of our
civilization. Our principal themes include the family, spirituality and
religion, human endeavor and creativity, human and engendered nature,
relationships between state and society, definitions of genres such as epic,
tragedy, and biography, and perceptions and sources of good and evil, of
wisdom, of morality, of the divine.

**

Course Requirements

**

Two one-thousand-word response-to-readings essays are worth twenty percent
each. Two five-hundred-word response-to-"event" essays are worth ten percent
each. An in-class presentation is worth five percent. There also is a final
examination worth twenty-five percent. Quizzes over readings, intended to
generate class discussion are worth approximately ten percent and will
**always** be announced in advance. The specifics of all these assignments
will be discussed in class



Two Essays over readings 40 percent

Two Response Essays 20 percent

Presentation 5 percent

Final Examination 25 percent

Quizzes _10 percent

_

Total 100 percent

A student who earns 93 percent of the total will receive an A, 90 an A-, 87 a
B+, 83 a B, 80 a B-, 77 a C+, 73 a C, 70 a C-, 67 a D+, and 60 a D. A failing
grade is a total of less than 60 percent.

**



Attendance and Make-ups

**

Although no grade points have been assigned for attendance, attendance **is**
mandatory. This course is designed to encourage discussion that elaborate upon
and complement, but do not repeat, our texts. The student is equally
responsible for in-class materials and readings. Make-up quizzes will be given
**only** with a valid excuse (illness requiring medical care, crisis in
immediate family, official university function) about which I was informed
**in advance**.

If you need course adaptations or accommodations because of a disability, if
you have emergency medical information to share with me, or if you need
special arrangements in case the building must be evacuated, please make an
appointment with me as soon as possible.

**

Assignments

Week I--12-16 January**: Mack, pp. 1625-1678 ( _The Song of Roland_ )

**

Week II--19-23 January**: Handout: Usama Ibn-Munqidh, _An Arab-Syrian
Gentleman and Warrior in the Period of the Crusades

_**

Week III--26-30 January**: Mack, pp. 1692-1766 (Dante, _The Divine Comedy:
Inferno_ )

**

Week IV--2-6 February**: Mack, pp. 1766-1829 (Dante, _The Divine Comedy:
Inferno_ )

**

Week V--9-13 February**: Mack, pp. 2219-2245 ( _The Tale of the Heike_ )

FIRST RESPONSE ESSAY DUE IN CLASS ON 13 FEBRUARY

**

Week VI--16-20 February**: Handout: Ibn Khaldun, _The Muqaddimah: An
Introduction to History

_

Presentations

**

Week VII--23-27 February**: Machiavelli, _The Discourses_ , pp. 93-199

Presentations

**

Week VIII--2-6 March**: Machiavelli, _The Discourses_ , pp. 200-261; Handout:
Martin Luther, "Secular Authority: To What Extent It Should Be Obeyed"

FIRST PAPER OVER READINGS DUE AT 5:00, 6 March

**

SPRING BREAK--9-13 March

Week IX--16-20 March**: Mack, pp. 1892-1960 (From Geoffrey Chaucer, _The
Canterbury Tales_ )

Presentations

**

Week X--23-27 March**: William Shakespeare, _Troilus and Cressida_ , pp.
7-111; Mack, pp. 2819-2825 (John Donne)

Presentations

**

Week XI--30 March-3 April**: William Shakespeare, _Troilus and Cressida_ , pp.
111-160; and _Coriolanus_ , pp. 7-88

Presentations

**

Week XII--6-10 April**: William Shakespeare, _Coriolanus_ , pp. 88-188;
Handout: Sor Juana Ines de la Cruz, "A Philosophical Satire"

SECOND RESPONSE ESSAY DUE IN CLASS ON 10 APRIL

**

Week XIII--13-17 April**: Daniel Defoe, _A Journal of the Plague Year_ , pp.
6-87; Handout: Jonathan Swift, "Against Abolishing Christianity"

Presentations

**

Week XIV--20-24 April**: Daniel Defoe, _A Journal of the Plague Year_ , pp.
87-165; Handout: Jonathan Swift, "A Modest Proposal"

SECOND PAPER OVER READINGS DUE AT 5:00, 24 April

**

Week XV--27 April-1 May**: Voltaire, _Candide

_

FINAL EXAMINATION: MONDAY, 4 MAY, 9:45-11:45



[HOME](default.htm)

