Date: Sat, 4 Apr 92 18:41:02 EST From: Don Bouldin  Subject: MUG 18
*****************************************************************************
MOSIS USERS' GROUP NEWSLETTER -- ISSUE# 18 April 4, 1992
************************** Table of Contents ********************************
Item Topic Page 18.1 Electronic Distribution
............................................ 2 18.2 MOSIS Users' Group
Software and Newsletters ........................ 3 18.3 Request for MOSIS
Process Models for Radiation Effects ............. 3 18.4 Error Discovered in
OCT Pad Frames ................................. 4 18.5 Behaviorial to Logic
Synthesis System (BLIS 2.0) Available ......... 5 18.6 Algorithm-Specific CAD
System (LAGER 4.0) Available ................ 6 18.7 Tuition-Free NSF Summer
Workshop on VLSI Design for Faculty ........ 8 18.8 Fast-Turn Prototyping
Services of Multi-project Wafers ............. 12 18.9 IEEE Transactions on
Microelectronic Systems (Due: May 1, 1992) .... 15 18.10 New ASIC Design Text
Available ..................................... 16 18.11 1992 Layout Benchmark
Participation Guidelines ..................... 17 18.12 Real-time Contest for
Standard Cell Placement Software ............. 22 18.13 Multi-Chip Module
Brokerage Service Available ...................... 23 18.14 Proceedings of
1992 IEEE Multichip Module Conference Available ..... 25 18.15 1992 Workshop
on VLSI Research and Education (April 9-10) .......... 25 18.16 Workshop on
Defect/Fault Tolerance in VLSI (Nov 4-6,1992;Due: May 1) 26 18.17 High-Level
Synthesis Workshop (Nov 4-6, 1992; Due: Jun 1) .......... 28 18.18 Conf. on
Wafer-Scale Integration (Jan 20-22, 1993; Due: Jun 1, 1992) 31 18.19 Conf. on
VLSI Design [India] (Jan 3-6, 1993; Due: Jun 1, 1992) ..... 32 18.20 Fourth
NASA Symposium on VLSI Design (Oct 29-30, 1992; Due: Jul 1).. 35 18.21 Conf.
on Hardware Desc. Lang. (Apr 26-28, 1993; Due: Oct 5, 1992) .. 36 Page 1 ^L
Page 2 18.1 Electronic Distribution (Contributed by Don Bouldin of the
University of Tennessee) This message contains Issue #18 of the MOSIS Users'
Group (MUG) Newsletter. This is the sixth issue being distribut- ed only via
electronic means to about 1200 individuals throughout the world who have
expressed an interest in VLSI systems design and specifically in using MOSIS,
the Metal-Oxide Semiconductor Implementation Service, that fabricates
integrated circuit pro- totypes inexpensively. We hope that you enjoy
receiving this newsletter and find it use- ful. Comments and suggestions
should be directed to the Editor along with any change in address. If you
prefer not to receive messages of this type, which will occur no more often
than month- ly, please contact the Editor. MUG Newsletter Editor Prof. Don
Bouldin Electrical & Computer Engineering University of Tennessee Knoxville,
TN 37996-2100 Tel: (615)-974-5444 FAX: (615)-974-5492 Email:
bouldin@sun1.engr.utk.edu Compmail II: D.Bouldin An email subscriber with an
internet, bitnet, compuserve or Comp- mail II address should have no
difficulty in receiving this newsletter. In the case of Compmail II, there is
no initial en- rollment fee and the monthly fee is based on actual usage.
Since in most locations, users may access the network via a lo- cal, toll-free
phone call, costs may be only a few dollars per month. Compmail II subscribers
also have the opportunity to utilize various off-line services, such as OAG,
Dow Jones, and a newsclips service. To enroll, contact: Ms. Jana Taylor IEEE
Computer Society 1730 Massachusetts Ave., N.W. Washington, DC 20036 Tel:
(202)-371-0101 FAX: (202)-728-9614 Internet: jana.taylor@compmail.com Compmail
II: Jana.Taylor Page 2 ^L Page 3 18.2 MOSIS Users' Group Software and
Newsletters (Contributed by Don Bouldin of the University of Tennessee) A
variety of design files and CAD tools contributed by the members of the MOSIS
Users' Group (MUG) are now available via anonymous ftp from "venera.isi.edu"
(128.9.0.32) in directory "pub/mug". The files "readme" and "index" should be
retrieved first. These files are provided "as is", but may prove very helpful
to those using the MOSIS integrated circuit prototyping service. The files
include the following: a pad frame generator program, a 66-bit Manchester
carry-skip adder, a tile file for MPLA using MOSIS Rev 6 rules, a netlist
convertor (Futurenet to OCT/bdnet), an analog neural network library of cells,
a new version of the switch-level simulator ESIM that can handle CMOS
transmission gates, an analog op amp, a static ram fabricated at 2-micron,
several complete TinyChip projects, a plotter utility for Spice, programs for
checking wells in MAGIC files, and copies of previously broadcast MUG
newsletters. If you do not have ftp capability or would like to subscribe to
the MUG newsletter at no charge, send a text message via elec- tronic mail to
bouldin@sun1.engr.utk.edu. 18.3 Request for MOSIS Process Models for Radiation
Effects (Contributed by Richard Spencer of Vanderbilt University) MOSIS models
for the 2-micron processes for varying levels of to- tal dose radiation are
needed. Anyone having these data avail- able should contact: Richard Spencer
Electrical Engineering Vanderbilt University Nashville, TN 37235 TEL:
(615)-794-8440 spencer@vuse.vanderbilt.edu Page 3 ^L Page 4 18.4 Error
Discovered in OCT Pad Frames (Contributed by Hardy Pottinger of the Univ. of
Missouri, Rolla) In a recent MOSIS fabrication run, none of my four chips were
functional. Parametric testing revealed that all four had a low impedance path
of 4-10 ohms between Vdd and GND and drew ex- cessive current. Input pins were
often at a high level with con- siderable (several ma) current drive capacity.
Chips were designed using Oct 5.0 with msu std cells and MOSIS padframe
supplied with Oct. Problems were traced to two primary causes. 1) Vdd and GND
power pads were switched from their original locations to pins 40 and 20
respectively to be in a more standard location. Although it was attempted to
keep pad mirroring correct as per padframe documentation, it was discovered
after the fact that there is a required orientation of mirrored and un-
mirrored pads around Vdd and GND pads. This orientation was not observed
resulting in design rule violations. 2) Most serious problem is that Oct's
fabprep produces no pwell geometry for the V4io pads. This was discovered
after the fact and traced to the fact that there is no pwell geometry at all
in the Oct facet for V4io or its variations. The documenta- tion does not
mention this. Furthermore, the geometry produced by fabprep for an nwell
technology for V4io is suspect. The geometry is considerably different from
the original MOSIS cif for SCN20 padframe. V4io as supplied with Oct should
probably not be used as is for fabrication in any technology, pwell or nwell.
I plan to start working on a new set of pads for oct using the original
padframe from mosis and see if we can get something that works this time. Paul
Cohen says there is a new fabprep and octmm scripts in Oct 5.1 and is sending
me a copy that should fix part of the problem, at least the part about
producing incorrect wells. There is a possibility that the MOSIS pads are
process dependent in which case a different padframe would be needed for
either pwell or nwell. The current frame should work with nwell but doesn't
have any pwell geometry at all which is what caught us. I'll see if I can't
crank out a pwell padframe from the SCP20 (ioP) padframe. I was going to try
this for the 1.6u pad- frames anyway. The current nwell frame 'should' work
for nwell processes but I think it's broken too. octmm seems to get lost on
the pad's well geometry and messes it up fairly badly. The new scripts may fix
that. We'll see. Will do. I've been talking to Paul Cohen, formerly at M2C,
about this as he did the conversion of the padframe to oct. They main- ly
supported m2c padframes since of course they do their own fab. The
Unfortunately nobody actually fabbed it or if they did, failed to mention the
problem to anyone! I'm going to try to fix that as best I can so nobody else
falls into the trap. Our pre- vious runs have all used the padframes as is
with just manual editing with Magic to convert i/o cells to i or o. Apparently
other successful Oct/Mosis users are doing the same and just us- ing Oct for
core logic or are using other padframe generators not part of the Oct package.
Anyone having additional information concerning this problem is requested to
contact Hardy Pottinger at hjp@ee.umr.edu. Page 4 ^L Page 5 18.5 Behaviorial
to Logic Synthesis System (BLIS 2.0) Available (Contributed by Gregg Whitcomb
of U. C. Berkeley) BLIS (Behavior-to-Logic Interactive Synthesis) is an
environment for the synthesis of digital circuits from high-level descrip-
tions. Version 2.0 supports functional-level synthesis starting from the ELLA
hardware description language. Other languages can easily be supported by
interfacing a parser to the internal data-flow representation of BLIS. All
synthesis and optimizations steps from HDL compilation down to layout
generation are fully integrated. For logic-level syn- thesis and optimization,
BLIS uses the Berkeley SIS (descendent of MIS-II) sequential logic synthesis
system. Several synthesis "scripts" are provided which can be used to
automatically syn- thesize logic and layout level descriptions for most
designs. Also, design specific synthesis and optimization procedures are
supported through an interactive command shell and database browser. BLIS
provides its own centralized object-oriented data- base with built-in design
management including limited version control. BLIS creates netlist
implementations in the OCT database for use by the various OCTtool programs
for standard-cell and macro-cell layout. Some users of BLIS have linked it
with the tools provid- ed with the Actel toolkit to provide a direct path to
FPGAs. Other layout styles and technologies can be integrated by inter- facing
to either OCT or the Berkeley BLIF logic interchange for- mat. ELLA is a
functional-level hardware description language developed originally by the
Royal Signals and Radar Establishment of the UK and currently marketed with a
simulator by Computer General Electronic Design, Limited. Unlike many existing
HDLs, ELLA has an applicative syntax which is well suited for specify- ing the
data-flow relationships found at the functional-level of design abstraction. A
functional level description is dis- tinguished from logic level descriptions
through its support for hierarchy, data types, and macro facilities. ELLA
provides a powerful set of macros such as interation and conditionals which
allow for parameterized module descriptions (e.g. n-bit adders). A number of
parameterized arithmetic units are provided in the BLIS library, including
five types of adders and a parallel mul- tiplier. Functional-level description
is most suited for designs such as array processors and datapath units which
are usually specified at this level of detail. BLIS was originally conceived
as an environment for high-level synthesis research. In this manner, it is
ideally suited for developing algorithmic and functional-level synthesis
representa- tions and algorithms. Other high-level synthesis researchers may
be interested in BLIS as a back-end to their algorithmic level tools,
providing them with the means for obtaining functional im- plementations. Page
5 ^L Page 6 BLIS can also be used as a tool for synthesizing design projects.
Once a working functional-level description has been obtained, optimized logic
and layout-level netlists can be easily produced. Current design projects
using BLIS include a collection of array processors for performing singular
value decomposition and matrix triangularization. BLIS is distributed through
the Industrial Liason's Program (ILP) Office of the UCB EECS department. The
cost of $250 covers media and distribution charges. Binaries are provided for
SUN4 and DEC MIPS architectures but BLIS should compile on most other machines
supported by the GNU C and C++ compilers (e.g. HP, vax, etc). ELLA language
documentation and simulator are not supplied with the BLIS distribution, but
can be obtained from Computer General. Ordering information can be obtained
from: Cindy Manly-Fields EECS/ILP Software Distribution 479 Cory Hall
University of California Berkeley, CA 94720 TEL: (510) 643-6687
cindy@hera.berkeley.edu For information about the ELLA language and simulator:
Computer General Electronic Design, Limited 5 Greenways Business Park
Bellinger Close, Chippenham, Wiltshire SN15 1BN, UK TEL: 44 24 9445566 If you
have questions or would like to be added to the BLIS mailing list, send email
to owner-blis@ic.Berkeley.EDU. 18.6 Algorithm-Specific CAD System (LAGER 4.0)
Available (Contributed by Bob Reese of Mississippi State University) The LAGER
system is a set of CAD tools for performing parameter- ized VLSI design with a
slant towards DSP applications (but not limited to DSP applications). A
standard cell library, datapath library, several module generators and several
pad libraries comprise the cell library. These tools and libraries have ori-
ginated from UC Berkeley, UCLA, USC, Mississippi State, and ITD. The tool
development has been funded by DARPA under the Rapid Prototyping Contract
headed by Bob Brodersen (UC Berkeley). LAGER 3.0 was described in MUG 15. In
this new release, all of the docs/tutorial for the SDL inter- face (textual)
have been updated. The LAGER 3.0, 3.1 releases concentrated on the Viewlogic
interface (graphical) and hence the SDL docs/tutorials became out of date. The
traditional LAGER tu- torials have been updated to include both SDL netlist
and SDL pinlist format examples. The "McPad" tool for creating padframes has
been dropped. The "padgroup" structure-processor written by Brian Richards at
UC Berkeley is now used for creating padframes. Padgroup is MUCH easier to use
than McPad; the entire padframe can be specified in one SDL file. Tutorial #8
has an example padframe using Padgroup for every pad library shipped with the
release. All pad li- braries now support IRSIM simulation through the pads.
Padgroup was shipped with the 3.0 release but only documented in the
Viewlogic/LAGER training slides; the SDL trainings slides now have a section
dedicated to padframe creation using Padgroup and Padroute. A "print_docs"
script is now in the common/docs directory; this will print out all LAGER
documentation into the exact 5-volume format available from Kinko's at MSU.
Octtools 5.0 sun4 binaries are shipped with the release; the LAGER Makefiles
have been updated to be compatible with Octtools 5.0 (but now incompatible
with Octtools 4.0). LightLisp is now being distributed as part of the LAGER
source tree since Light- Lisp is no longer part of the standard Octtools
release (many users experienced headaches trying to compile LAGER 3.1 with
Oct- tools 5.0 because LightLisp was missing). The release includes sun4
binaries for ALL tools; you can now LOAD and GO if you have a sun4. The
release scripts have also been reworked to make it easier for only parts of
the release to be unpacked/compiled; this helps if you are working with disk
space limitations. The sun4 binary of TimberWolfSC-6_0 is included in the
release; the standard cell scripts have been changed to be compatible with
either TW 6.0 or TW 4.2; the standard cell scripts will use what- ever version
of TimberWolfSC is available. Also a new wolfe (wolfe6.0, in the LAGER source
tree) has been added to be able to interface to TW6.0; the wolfe shipped with
Octtools5.0 will not work with TW6.0. At the request of Carl Sechen (author of
TW6.0), TimberWolfSC-6_0 is only available for University users of LAGER. See
the appended installation instructions for further information on how
commercial users can obtain TimberWolfeSC-6_0. The UCLA FIRGEN tool (FIR
filter generator) now supports a stan- dard cell layout and also Actel mapping
in addition to a tiled macrocell layout. Also, a new IIR filter generator tool
has been added. The Vanda/Viewlogic inteface has several examples of using
Viewlogic's VHDL synthesis package; a synthesis library for MSU standard cell
library is provided. There is now an ITD/MSU Stan- dard Cell Viewlogic library
which does not use VHDL; this is for those Viewlogic sites without VHDL. A
common/contrib directory has been added; a microarchitecture compiler which
uses LAGER has been included; this contribution is from the University of
Texas at Arlington. Only the X11R4 libaries/include files needed by LAGER are
shipped on the tape; the full X11R4 sun4 binaries/libraries/release are still
available via FTP. The usu- al number of bugs and glitches fixed in all
systems. Page 6 ^L Page 7 The major systems in LAGER 4.0 include the
following: LAGERIV: data management (DMoct), Standard cell place/route
(Stdcell/wolfe), datapath compiler (dpp), macro-cell place/route (Flint), cell
tiler (TimLAGER), padframe maker (Padgroup), pad- to-core router (Padroute),
Logic Synthesis (Bds2stdcell/Bdsyn/misII); standard cell, datapath, macro cell
libraries. CAD: functional simulator (THOR), layout editor (magic), switch-
level simulator (IRSIM). VANDA: VANDA is an integrated environment for
designing and im- plementing digital signal processing circuits and systems
for communication systems. VANDA integrates the design process from system
specification and simulation to IC design. Viewlogic's Workview is used as a
front-end schematic editor. CAPSIM, THOR and VHDL are available for
simulations at the functional and hardware levels. The LAGER system is used to
generate the layout of the design. VANDA employs the concept of functional
compilers to generate the hardware implementation of complex system blocks
from system-level specifications. Functional compilers for FIR filters, PN
generators and DDFS (Direct Digital Frequency Syn- thesizers) are available.
The Viewlogic interface used by VANDA supports a schematic capture design
methodology all the way through the padframe. The ITD Standard Cell 2.3
library and the datapath library (dpp) are supported with Viewlogic symbols,
schematics (where appropriate) and VHDL models. Complete Viewsim support is
included. Logic synthesis via the Bdsyn/misII tools from the Octtools is also
supported. A limited form of parameterized editing is supported (parameterized
nets, com- ponents, but no looping). A complete set of training slides (100+)
which details this interface is included in the LAGER do- cumentation. The
Viewlogic/LAGER interface has been used at MSU in our junior/senior level CAD
class with great success for the past year. VANDA development is being done
within Rajeev Jain's (one of the original LAGER developers) group at UCLA.
COMPILER: automatic filter compilers from UCLA; contains both FIR filter
generators (FIRGEN) and IIR filter generators (IIRGEN). This compiler
development is being done within Rajeev Jain's group at UCLA. SYSTEM
REQUIREMENTS: LAGER 4.0 requires Octtools 5.0 or higher and X11R4 support.
Sun4 binaries for Octtools 5.0 are included on the distribution tape. The
release requires about 230 Mb to build (if you load EVERYTHING, including the
octtools) but can can be pared down signficantly ( < 150 Mb) after building by
deleting libraries and systems you don't want to use. More de- tailed disk
usage figures are given in the installation instruc- tions. A pared-down
LAGER-only system (no Vanda or compilers) can fit in under 100 Mb. Page 7 ^L
Page 8 Send email to reese@erc.msstate.edu if you are interested in ob-
taining the toolset via FTP. If you cannot get the distribution via ftp then
send one 1/4" 600 ft. tape OR an 8 mm tape (Exabyte compatible) to Bob Reese
by phone at (601)-325-3670 or at one of the following addresses: (US Mail
Address) P.O. Box 6176 Mississippi State, MS 39762 (FEDEX) 2 Research
Boulevard Starkville, MS 39759 Be sure to include a return FEDEX waybill we
can use to ship your tape back to you. Instead of sending a tape and FEDX
waybill, you can also just send us a check for $75 and we will send you back a
tape. Make the check payable to Mississippi State Univ. The tape will be
written on a high density tape drive (150 Mb). Old- er low density SUN tape
drives (60 Mb) cannot read this format so you need to have access to one of
SUN's newer tape drives. 18.7 Tuition-Free NSF Summer Workshop on VLSI Design
for Faculty (Contributed by Bonnie MacDonald of the M2C) SUMMER WORKSHOP ON
INTRODUCTORY VLSI DESIGN JULY 13-24, 1992 MASSACHUSETTS MICROELECTRONICS
CENTER Westborough, MA The Massachusetts Microelectronics Center (M2C) will
conduct a two-week, project-oriented workshop on introductory VLSI design for
engineering faculty, sponsored by the National Science Foundation. The goal of
this course is to foster the development of undergraduate microelectronics
programs by providing undergraduate faculty with the resources necessary to
conduct a course in VLSI design. Topics covered will include: Introduction to
UNIX* Device Behavior Design Methodology Design Styles Logic Synthesis Analog
Design Device Processing Fundamentals Lectures will be supplemented by design
and simulation laboratory exercises on computer-aided design (CAD)
workstations with an emphasis on public-domain CAD tools in a UNIX
environment. A unique feature of the course will be the design, fabrication,
and test of a chip by each participant. Working in teams of two, participants
will select a design project and starting with a func- tional specification,
will design, simulate and generate test vectors for the circuit. Previously
fabricated chips designed to the same project specifica- tions (some
functioning, others with design flaws) will be tested during the workshop.
Shortly after the workshop, participants' chips will be fabricated, packaged,
and mailed to them. Page 8 ^L Page 9 WORKSHOP STRUCTURE The workshop will take
place over a two-week period, Monday through Friday. Generally, the morning
sessions (9:00 A.M. to noon) will consist of lectures and discussions. The
afternoon sessions (1:00 P.M. to 5:00 P.M.) will be a combination of lectures
and laboratory exercises. The computer lab will stay open evenings so that
participants may explore the design tools beyond the bounds of the structured
laboratory exercises. Classes will be taught by experienced VLSI educators.
LOCATION, LODGING, MEALS M2C is located on a pleasantly-wooded 36-acre campus
in Westborough, Massachu- setts, 35 miles west of Boston. It is readily
accessible from Logan Airport in Boston or Worcester Airport. Participants
will be housed in a nearby hotel. A shuttle service from the hotel to the M2C
campus will be available. Lunch will be provided at M2C, and participants will
receive a $150 stipend to help cover other meals and incidental expenses.
Participants' home institutions will be expected to cover transportation
expenses. FACILITIES On-site facilities include a VLSI CAD Center, a Classroom
Center, and an Integrated Circuit Fabrication Facility. The Student Laboratory
is equipped with networked UNIX workstations, a 24" color plotter, laser
printers and chip testers. ELIGIBILITY Applicants must be full-time faculty
members in Electrical Engineering, Computer Science, or a closely related
discipline, at an accredited undergradu- ate institution. A maximum of 30
participants will be accepted. Minority and female applicants are encouraged
to apply. Preference will be given to those faculty members who have made a
strong commitment to establishing an undergrad- uate microelectronics program.
Only one applicant from any given institution will be accepted, unless there
are unfilled spaces in the workshop after this criterion has been met. A
waiting list of five applicants will be maintained to fill any cancellations.
* UNIX is a trademark of AT&T; Bell Laboratories Page 9 ^L Page 10 SUMMER
WORKSHOP ON INTRODUCTORY VLSI DESIGN SYLLABUS I. Overview of VLSI education A.
Importance of VLSI design in undergraduate microelectronics systems education
B. Design styles C. Technology choices for implementation II. VLSI design A.
MOS devices and circuits B. Timing and loading C. Using SPICE D.
Microprogramming E. Logic design F. Logic-level simulation G. Design for
testability H. Physical place & route III. Analog CMOS VLSI design A.
Operational amplifier design B. Simulation techniques C. Switched-capacitor
circuit design D. Switched-capacitor filter design E. Other circuits, e.g. A-D
and D-A converters and regulators IV. Logic synthesis with Oct tools A. OCT
tools design overview B. OCT design input and simulation C. OCT layout and
technologies V. Design project topics A. Project specification B. Design
partitioning C. Initial project design review D. Testing sample chips E.
Performance optimization techniques F. Padframes, I/O pads, wiring, design
preparation and submittal G. Final project design review VI. CMOS Process
technology A. Process overview B. Tour of M2C's IC Fabrication Facility VII.
Course logistics A. Curriculum development B. VLSI lab configuration issues
(hardware, software and network) C. Public domain VLSI CAD tools D. Commercial
CAE tools E. Textbooks, tutorials, courseware and videotapes F. Chip
fabrication and test VIII. Additional topics A. Research opportunities in VLSI
B. Demonstrations of commercial tools and FPGAs Page 10 ^L Page 11 VLSI DESIGN
LABORATORIES AND PROJECTS Track A: Analog VLSI Design Using MAGIC I.
Laboratories A. Getting to know UNIX and the VI editor B. Pre-layout
simulation with SPICE C. Layout with MAGIC D. Simulation with IRSIM E.
Padframe generation and wiring F. Operational Amplifier Simulation G. Switched
capacitor circuit design H. Switched capacitor filter design I. Testing sample
project chips II. Projects A. 4-bit D-A converter (current mode) B. 4-bit D-A
converter (switched capacitor filter) Track B: Logic Synthesis Using OCT Tools
I. Laboratories A. Getting to know UNIX and the VI editor B. Physical editing
with Vem C. Symbolic editing with Vem D. Schematic capture with Vem E. A BCD
counter with 7 segment output F. Padframe generation and wiring G. Testing
sample project chips II. Projects A. 4-digit clock B. Electronic craps game
SUMMER WORKSHOP ON INTRODUCTORY DESIGN APPLICATION FORM Name:
_____________________________________________________ Title:
_____________________________________________________ Department:
_____________________________________________________ Institution:
_____________________________________________________ Street Address:
_____________________________________________________ City, State, Zip:
_____________________________________________________ Telephone:
______________________ FAX:__________________________ 1\. Briefly describe how
you plan to apply the knowledge gained in this workshop to initiate or enhance
a microelectronics program at your home institution:
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
Page 11 ^L Page 12 2\. Signature of your dean or department head indicating
his/her recommenda- tion that you attend this course:
__________________________________________Title:________________________ 3\.
Enclose a curriculum vita detailing educational background, academic, and/or
industrial experience. Applications must be received by Friday, May 1, 1992.
Notices of acceptance or denial will be mailed on Friday, May 15, 1992. Mail
applications Bonnie MacDonald, Program Manager to: Summer Workshop on
Introductory VLSI Design Massachusetts Microelectronics Center 75 North Drive
Westborough, MA 01581 For further informa- Phone: (508) 870-0312 ext. 231
tion: FAX: (508) 898-2275 Electronic mail: macdonald@m2c.org 18.8 Fast-Turn
Prototyping Services of Multi-project Wafers (Contributed by Bonnie MacDonald
of M2C) Are you seeking low-cost prototyping and fast-turnaround time to meet
your project development schedule? Consider six packaged parts of 2 micron
CMOS (die size 144 x 144 mils) for only $650 and a turnaround time of 2-3
weeks! An alterna- tive prototyping service for VLSI designers now exists. The
Massachusetts Microelectronics Center (M2C) -- a not- for-profit organization
established by the state legislature -- was created initially as a way to
support VLSI educational pro- grams. Up until recently, its efforts have been
focused almost exclusively on fabricating integrated circuits for students en-
rolled in eleven universities in Massachusetts. Unlike similar programs,
however, M2C does not broker these designs to commer- cial foundries. The
Center owns and operates a dedicated IC Fa- brication Facility in Westboro,
Massachu- setts with 7,000 square feet of fully-equipped, class 10 clean room
space. In the past year alone, M2C has completed eight runs consisting of more
than 400 student designs using a multi-project wafer (MPW) approach. Now, in
keeping with its objective of supporting the growth of the electronics
industry, M2C is making its low-cost prototyping service available to
commercial ASIC designers and system build- ers. Page 12 ^L Page 13 The secret
of low-cost is the multi-project wafer approach where up to 100 designs can be
manufactured with one mask set. Companies purchase only as much space as they
need. As such, com- panies can reduce the cost of prototyping by essentially
sharing the cost of mask-making and wafer processing. In addition, the Center
has developed an innovative production system which reduces the total cycle
time to 2-3 weeks from design submittal to shipment of packaged parts. Design
files are combined into unit cells which are then placed at several locations
upon a five-inch wafer. The assembled unit cell files are then fractured using
Dracula software from Cadence Design Systems, producing a MEBES tape, which is
sent to an external mask vendor. Within three days, the first three masks
arrive at M2C and an MPW lot begins processing at a rate that ensures that the
wafers move through production as fast as the remaining nine masks arrive from
the mask vendor. Assembly, an in-house operation, includes dicing, inspection,
and packaging of standard-sized die with a standard pin-out configuration
within one or two days. Thus com- panies are able to receive chips for
subsequent testing and evaluation in 21 days or less. The base-line technology
at M2C is a 2 micron, dual-level metal, n-well CMOS technology licensed by
Digital Equipment Cor- poration, compatible with the MOSIS SCMOS design rules.
Design files are submitted in either CIF or GDSII data formats via mag- netic
tape, electronic mail or File Transfer Protocol (FTP). The majority of the
student designs have been created using public domain VLSI design tools
developed at the University of Califor- nia at Berkeley i.e. MAGIC and OCT
TOOLS. M2C is now working with several commercial vendors to verify a path
from their design capture system to a public domain standard cell library with
corresponding simulation models. Novel processes and devices can be developed
at the M2C facility using the multi-project wafer approach or a customer
supplied mask set. M2C is also currently working with Allegro MicroSystems,
Inc. on a project involving a proprietary BiCMOS process. In this instance,
M2C is providing full foundry services for volume production. MPW runs are
scheduled every two months and run frequency will be increased as the number
of submitted designs increases. Die sizes and prices range from 144 x 144 mils
for $650 to 384 x 384 mils for $2,600. Standard packages are 40 or 64 pin DIPS
or customer-specified. The padframe and bonding diagram can be customer-
supplied or M2C provides a choice of four padframes, ranging from the MOSIS
tiny-chip 40-pin padframe (2220 x 2250 mm) to the M2C standard 64-pin padframe
(6840 x 6840 mm). For designers who require color plots of their chip designs,
M2C offers a unique service. Upon submittal of a design for fabrica- tion, a
24-inch, four-color plot of the design file can be or- dered for an additional
$20. For design submittal information, the latest run schedule and price list,
contact Bonnie MacDonald at 508-870-0312 ext. 231 or via electronic mail at
macdonald@m2c.org. Page 13 ^L Page 14 M2C FAST-TURN PROTOTYPING SERVICES
MULTI-PROJECT WAFER PRICE SCHEDULE February 11, 1992 Die Size (mils)Standard
Pkg. Minimum Total Additional Quantity Price Chips (1-99) 144 x 144 40 pin
DIP* 6 $650 $65/ea. 192 x 192 40 pin DIP** 6 950 95/ea. 288 x 288 64 pin DIP 6
1,950 195/ea. 384 x 384 chip 6 2,600 260/ea. 576 x 576 chip 6 6,000 600/ea.
(MPW unit cell) * accommodates M2C small 40-pin padframe (3350 x 3350 um) or
MOSIS tiny chip 40-pin padframe (2250 x 2250 um) ** accommodates M2C standard
40-pin padframe (4560 x 4560 um) CIF or GDSII files are admissible, using
design rules compatible with MOSIS SCMOS Rev. 7. MPW runs are scheduled
approximately every six weeks (next closing dates: 4/18/92 and 5/30/92) For
additional information regarding design submittal procedures and pad frames,
contact: Bonnie MacDonald phone 508-870-0312 x231 or email macdonald@m2c.org
Page 14 ^L Page 15 18.9 IEEE Transactions on Microelectronic Systems (Due: May
1, 1992) (Contributed by Steve Kang of the University of Illinois) CALL FOR
PAPERS IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MICROELECTRONIC SYSTEMS Starting in January
1993,the IEEE Transcations on Microelectronic Systems will be published as a
new quarterly journal under the cosponsorship of IEEE Circuits and Systems
Society, IEEE Computer Society, and IEEE Solid-State Circuits Council. Design
and real- ization of microelectronic systems using VLSI/ULSI technologies
require close collaboration among scientists and engineers in the fields of
systems architecture, logic and circuit design, chips and wafers fabrication,
packaging, testing and systems applica- tions. Generation of specifications,
design and verification must be performed at all abstraction levels, including
the systems,register-transfer, logic, circuit, transistor and process levels.
To address this critical area through a common forum, the IEEE Transctions on
Microelectronic Systems has been founded. The editorial board consisting of
international experts invites original papers which emphasize and merit the
novel systems in- tegration aspects of microelectronic systems including in-
teractions among systems design and partitioning,logic and memory design,
digital and analog circuit design,layout synthesis, CAD tools, chips and wafer
fabrication,testing and packaging,and sys- tems level qualification. Thus,the
coverage of this new Transac- tions will focus on VLSI/ULSI microelectronic
systems integra- tion. Topics of special interest include, but are not
strictly limited to, the following: * Systems Specifications, Design and
Partitioning * System-Level Test * Reliable VLSI/ULSI Systems * High
Performance Computing and Communication Systems * Wafer Scale Integration and
Multichip Modules (MCMs) * High-Speed Interconnects in Microelectronic Systems
* VLSI/ULSI Neural Networks and Their Applications * Mixed Analog/Digital
Systems * Cost, Performance Tradeoffs of VLSI/ULSI Systems Prospective authors
are requested to submit seven copies of the complete manuscript of up to 25
double-spaced typewritten pages, plus up to 10 pages of figures. Shorter
papers of 6 or less pages and up to 3 pages of figures will be considered for
publi- cation as a Transactions brief paper. To be con- sidered for the
January or April, 1993 issue, manuscripts should be sent by May 1, 1992 to the
Editor-in-Chief: Prof. Sung-Mo (Steve) Kang University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign Coordinated Science Laboratory 1101 W. Springfield Ave Urbana, IL
61801 (Office) 217-244-0577 (Fax) 217-244-1653 e-mail kang@uivlsi.csl.uiuc.edu
Members of the sponsoring IEEE Societies may subscribe to this new
Transactions for $12 per year which will be published quarterly in 1993.
Contact IEEE Service Center, 445 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, NJ 08855-1331, Phone:
201-981-0060. Page 15 ^L Page 16 18.10 New ASIC Design Text Available
(Contributed by Mark Rosneck of Mentor Graphics) "Successful ASIC Design the
First Time Through" by John Huber and Mark Rosneck, ISBN 0-442-00312-9, Van
Nostrand Reinhold (1991), gives a detailed account of the entire ASIC process,
showing pro- fessionals how to get a complex ASIC design right by using proper
management techniques. Written in terms that a novice designer can understand,
the authors point out the common pitfalls along the path of ASIC development,
and explain a number of helpful shortcuts in ASIC design. The authors also
address the design process and the interrela- tionships among the designer,
the tool provider, and the ASIC vendor. They then discuss design creation
tools, outling the various tool options and tradeoffs in capturing the design.
A complete chapter on design methodologies will help designers understand the
pros and cons of using the tools and techniques available, to fit their
development and time-to-market needs. Readers will next learn why simulation
is important as a means of developing a software prototype of the ASIC.
Included is a con- cise treatment of the components of typical simulation
tools to help designers identify the particular tool that meets their specific
simulation requirements. The book also explores the unique role of timing in
ASIC design. The authors show how the ASIC vendor, the tool vendor, and the
designer must work in concert to analyze the ASIC design accu- rately. In
addition, the authors discuss fault simulation-- helping designers develop
increased confidence in their final designs--and review test constraints that
will enable them to keep designs on schedule. Table of Contents: 1\.
Introduction to ASICs and ASIC Design 2\. The ASIC Design Process 3\. Design
Creation for ASICs 4\. Design Methodologies for ASICs 5\. Logic Simulation 6\.
Timing 7\. Fault Simulation 8\. Test 9\. Summary and Conclusions Qualified
Mentor Graphics' customers can obtain a copy at no charge through the Gateway
Select Catalog. See the card insert at page 14. To obtain a copy of the
Gateway Select Catalog, send your name, title, company name, and address to:
Mentor Graphics P.O. Box 12648 Portland, OR 97212 Attn: Gateway Select The
phone number for Gateway Select is 1-800-547-3000. Page 16 ^L Page 17 If you
would like to purchase a copy at the list price of $44.95, contact the
publisher: Credit card orders: 1-800-926-2665 Mail Order: Van Nostrand
Reinhold Mail Order Department P.O. Box 668 Florence, KY 41022-0668 If you
would like to purchase multiple copies, contact Myra Sinc- off, Van Nostrand
Reinhold, 212-254-3232 Ext. 344 for discount information. If you are outside
of North America, the distributor for Van Nos- trand Reinhold is Thomson
International Publishing. Orders and inquiries should be addressed to: Thomson
International Publishing 10 Davis Drive Belmont, California 94002 U.S.A.
Telephone: (415) 598-0784 Telex: 348 383 Fax: (415) 598-9953 18.11 1992 Layout
Benchmark Participation Guidelines (Contributed by Krzysztof Kozminski of
MCNC) A special session on layout benchmarks will be held as a part of the
International Workshop on Layout Synthesis. Researchers are invited to submit
the results of the benchmark runs performed with their software for
presentation at this session. Benchmark data The benchmark set includes all
the data distributed in connection with the International Workshop on Layout
Synthesis held in May 1990, as well as several new circuits. The following is
a complete listing of the benchmarks: * Building block (macro block) place &
route: xerox (10 blocks, 203 nets), ami33 (33 blocks, 123 nets), apte (9
blocks, 97 nets), ami49 (49 blocks, 408 nets), hp (11 blocks, 83 nets). Added
this year is xlii (62 blocks, 1611 nets). * Layout compaction: afakr (26
transistors), afa (26 transistors), c132_2 (hierarchical, 13 subcells
containing 132 transistors), mul2x2 (hierarchical, 4 subcells containing 54
transistors), mul4x4 (hierarchical, 13 subcells containing 222 transistors),
mul8x8 (hierarchical, 28 subcells containing 518 transistors), mul16x16
(hierarchical, 58 subcells containing 1110 transistors). Page 17 ^L Page 18 *
Layout synthesis (from transistor-level netlist): ti_alu (306 transistors),
highway (332 transistors), accum (648 transistors), fract (722 transistors),
struct (8990 transistors), biomed (43486 transistors). Added this year are:
avq.small (139555 transistors), avq.large (152595 transistors). * Mixed
building block/standard cell place & route: g2 (113 cells, 17 blocks, 295
nets), a3 (519 cells, 27 blocks, 881 nets), t1 (434 cells, 26 blocks, 1059
nets). * Standard cell place & route: fract (125 cells, 147 nets), primary1
(752 cells, 904 nets), struct (1888 cells, 1920 nets), industry1 (2271 cells,
2594 nets), industry1a (2271 cells, 2479 nets), primary2 (2907 cells, 3029
nets), biomed (6417 cells, 5766 nets), industry2 (12142 cells, 13915 nets),
industry3 (15059 cells, 21966 nets). Industry1 and industry1a require the
over-the-cell routing capability. Added this year are: balu (701 cells, 702
nets), sioo (602 cells, 259 nets), avq.small (21854 cells, 22124 nets),
avq.large (25114 cells, 25384 nets). * Gate array place & route: primary1,
primary2, industry2, industry3 (cell and net counts are given in the standard
cell list). * Floorplanning: xerox (10 blocks, 203 nets), fan (10 blocks, 312
nets). How to obtain the data The benchmark data can be obtained from MCNC in
one of two ways: by ftp or on a 9-track tape. 1) Users who have access to the
Internet: You may establish an 'ftp' connection to the host 'mcnc.org' (also
known as 'mcnc.mcnc.org'; IP node number 128.109.130.3) and copy the files
using the 'mget' command. The login name is 'anonymous' and the password is
any non-empty string of characters. The files are in the
'pub/benchmark/LayoutSynth92' directory. Please consult the ftp manual for the
details of operation. If you use ftp to obtain the benchmark data, please let
me know about it so that I can contact you in case of any changes or
corrections to the benchmarks or the software provided with them. If you are a
UNIX user, please check if you have the 'uncompress' command available.
Transferring the benchmarks in a compressed form reduces the transfer time
significantly. After establishing the ftp connection to mcnc.org, set the
binary transfer mode and use the 'get' command of ftp to import either the
bench90.tar.Z, redun90.tar.Z, and bench92.tar.Z files (about 3.7 Mbytes) if
you do have the uncompress command available, or bench90.tar, redun90.tar, and
bench92.tar (about 13 Mbytes) otherwise. Page 18 ^L Page 19 NOTE: If you
already have the benchmarks from 1990, all you need is the file bench92.tar
(about 4 Mbytes) or its compressed version bench92.tar.Z (about 1 Mbyte).
Furthermore, retrieve floorplanning benchmark 'fan' (a buggy net name has been
fixed in it). Before un- tarring bench92.tar, remove or archive the contents
of the directories: bench/v2 and bench/yal2vpnr. The new release fixes a
couple of bugs that surfaced when processing the new benchmarks. Here are more
details about retrieving the benchmarks. You might also want to consult the
ftp manual for additional information. The command sequence to establish a
connection to the host machine is: ftp mcnc.mcnc.org anonymous (in response to
the 'Name' prompt) (your id) (in response to the 'password' prompt) cd
pub/benchmark/LayoutSynth92 mget LayoutSynth92.* binary mget *.tar.Z bye On
your local machine, uncompress the file with the command uncompress
bench90.tar.Z redun90.tar.Z bench92.tar.Z Un-tar the files with the commands
(recall the earlier explanation of why removing files below is necessary). tar
xf bench90.tar tar xf redun90.tar /bin/rm -rf bench/v2 bench/yal2vpnr tar xf
bench92.tar Users who can use 'tar' but without the 'uncompress' command
should get the non-compressed tar files: cd pub/benchmark/LayoutSynth92 binary
mget *.tar bye then use the 'tar' command on your local machine as explained
earlier: Page 19 ^L Page 20 If you are not a UNIX user and do not have the tar
utility available, you will have to copy the benchmarks explicitly. The files
with benchmark descriptions are stored in the 'bench' subdirectory of the
pub/benchmark/LayoutSynth92 directory and in its subdirectories. As an added
complication, the translators and some of the other programs in the bench
directory will not work properly under a different directory structure. Simply
'mget'-ing all the files into one directory on the local machine will destroy
the original directory structure. You should re-create the original structure
and use ftp to copy the files into the correct places. You can use the '!
mkdir' command to make a new directory on your local machine from inside ftp.
You should first replicate the entire tree of subdirectories rooted in the
pub/benchmark/LayoutSynth92 directory. Use the 'get' command of ftp to the
Index file from the pub/benchmark/LayoutSynth92 directory. This file lists all
subdirectories and files with the benchmark data and you can use it to create
the necessary tree of directories. Then, use the 'cd' and 'lcd' commands of
ftp to traverse synchronously the tree of directories on MCNC's ftp server
machine and on your machine. In each directory, use the 'mget' command of ftp
to copy all files from this directory to the corresponding directory on your
machine. Here is a sample set of ftp commands used in the process of copying
the benchmark data file-by-file. cd pub/benchmark/LayoutSynth92 mget
LayoutSynth92.* prompt # Should turn prompting off. ! mkdir bench # make
'bench' dir on local machine. lcd bench # move to 'bench' on local machine. cd
bench # move to 'bench' on remote machine. mget * # get files from remote to
local 'bench'. !mkdir block # make 'bench/block' on local. lcd block # etc. cd
block mget * ! mkdir ../compact lcd ../compact cd ../compact mget * ! mkdir
c123_2.subcells lcd c123_2.subcells cd c123_2.subcells mget * ! mkdir
../mul.subcells lcd ../mul.subcells cd ../mul.subcells ! mkdir ../../flex lcd
../../flex cd ../../flex mget * ... etc. for the remaining directories. We
strongly recommend that you log in via ftp around May 1 to check for changes
and corrections. Any such changes will be described in the file
'ANNOUNCEMENTS'. Page 20 ^L Page 21 2) Users who do not have access to the
Internet: We are prepared to send you a tape in tar format. Please contact
Doug Maltais at MCNC by e-mail (maltais@mcnc.org) or by phone (919)-248-1952
and tell him your requirements. ACM SIGDA is providing funds to cover the cost
of tapes and shipping, so there is no cost to you for this service. If you
wish so, the benchmarks will be sent to you by electronic mail. There are
about 13 megabytes of data. Since some mailers restrict the message size,
please be prepared to receive the benchmarks in about 130 installments. Please
let me know if you have the 'compress' and 'uudecode' utilities - encoding the
benchmark data with those two programs reduces the size of the transferred
data to about 3.7 Mb. Benchmark presentation You may choose to present your
results either as a highlight of yours scheduled workshop presentation or
during a special session that will introduce the benchmark posters. In either
case, please submit the benchmark results to me at the address given at the
end of this letter. All results will be compiled as anonymous contributions
unless you request to be identified. During your benchmark presentation,
please be prepared to describe briefly the distinguishing features of your
layout system. An overhead projector will be provided. Your presentation
should not take more than 5 minutes and 2-4 foils. If you use the layout
benchmarks in your research but do not plan to attend the workshop, please do
not hesitate to send in your results anyway. If you include two to three short
paragraphs with a short description of your layout system, they will be
conveyed to the workshop participants together with your results. In case of
problems ... While most of the benchmarks were used for the past two years
without significant problems reported, it is possible that there may be some
ambiguity or errors in the recent additions. Therefore, please send your
electronic mail address and phone number to kk@mcnc.org when you pick up the
benchmarks. In this way, if corrections or explanations are needed, they can
be broadcast without delay. If you discover an error in a benchmark (such as
two gates shorted together), we ask that you try to run it as it stands, if
possible, and then again with your fix. Of course, please inform me about the
problem as soon as possible. Of course, please also let me know about any
comments or suggestions regarding the benchmarks or documentation. I can be
reached at the following address: Krzysztof Kozminski MCNC Center for
Microelectronics PO. Box 12889 3021 Cornwallis Road Research Triangle Park,
North Carolina 27709 tel. (919)-248-1969, fax (919)-248-1455 e-mail:
kk@mcnc.org Page 21 ^L Page 22 18.12 Real-time Contest for Standard Cell
Placement Software (Contributed by Krzysztof Kozminski of MCNC) As a part of
the 1992 International Workshop on Layout Synthesis, we intend to stage a
real-time contest for standard cell placement software. As you are undoubtedly
aware, there exists a polarization of opinions in the CAD community whether
statistical methods such as simulated annealing or algorithmic methods are
better to use for placement if the smallest-area solution is desired. At this
year's Layout Synthesis Workshop we hope to have a showdown of the best
placement programs. The conditions are as follows: * MCNC will provide remote
access to a number of identically configured workstations. We intend to
provide a number of SPARCstations 2, with 32 MB of RAM, running under SunOS
4.1.1. We expect these workstations to be accessible on the afternoon of
Monday, May 11. * Exactly at noon on Monday, May 18, a previously unpublished
netlist will be provided to the contest participants. It will contain
approximately 13,000 standard cells. The objective will be to produce a
smallest-area core using a given number of rows, with I/O from the core placed
in desired locations on the core perimeter (it should be possible to river-
route to the pads, but pads and river-routing are not included in the total
area). The first run counts: the idea is to see how well your program would
perform for somebody who treats is as a tool (as opposed to a research object)
and wants the job done without fine-tuning of any parameters. * 48 hours
later, exactly at noon on Wednesday, May 20, the smallest- area layouts will
be gathered from all participants and plotted on a color Versatec. The
presentation of the results will take place in the evening session at 7:30 PM.
* To isolate the placement quality from the routing quality, the global router
and compacting channel router will be provided respectively by Yale University
and MCNC. The output data from the placement program should be in the VPNR
format. Essentially, this format lists cells in each row, from left to the
right. A sample input for the global router will be provided (in a couple of
days) in the directory pub/benchmark/LayoutSynth92/SampleGR. We believe that
both routers are state-of-the-art; however, if you prefer to use your own, you
can run them in addition to ours. The final output should be in the CIF
format. We expect that the time used for routing this benchmark will be about
6 CPU hours. To be safe, you should probably time your placement to finish by
Tuesday, 6 PM. To participate in the Timberwolf Hunt, please let me know your
intent before May 1 at the address below. The number of entrants is limited to
the number of available workstations. If you have any suggestions as to the
contest itself or its format, please let me know. The new benchmark data will
be available in three formats: VPNR, Timberwolf and YAL. The contest
participants should ensure that they can read one of these formats. YAL has
been used to describe benchmark circuits since 1987, and VPNR since 1989.
Please try out your software on the benchmarks distributed in the previous
years: these benchmarks included two sample parsers for either of these
languages, so you should have no problems doing translation to your data
format of choice. Page 22 ^L Page 23 18.13 Multi-Chip Module Brokerage Service
Available (Contributed by Bernard Courtois of CMP) As a means of meeting the
challenges of the near future, CMP is opening a multi-chip module brokerage
service for research, educational and industrial purposes. The service is open
to any- one world-wide. CMP has selected the ALLEGRO MCM software from
CADENCE. The software will be available in Grenoble where CMP is creating a
MCM Center. CMP users can today create and simulate a design to be packaged in
an MCM, and come to CMP in Grenoble, in order to design the layout of the
interconnections. Thermal and electrical issues will be managed through the
use of integrat- ed analysis tools in ALLEGRO-MCM. No fee is required from
French academic users, and a contractual charge will be proposed to oth- er
users. Training on ALLEGRO-MCM will be proposed by CMP. The date will be
announced soon. No fee will be required from French academic at- tendees. In
addition, courses will be available from CADENCE on ALLEGRO-MCM, academic
attendees being offered a 50 % discount when getting a course in view of
designing a MCM through CMP. Two weeks of training are required and should be
sufficient to carry out a good job on ALLEGRO-MCM. CMP has selected DASSAULT
ELECTRONIQUE as the substrate sup- plier. Its mature "PCM" technology
(Photoformed Ceramic Module) is actually an advanced traditional hybrid thick-
film tech- nology, that can achieve 150 5-m pitch on a ceramic substrate (75
5-m lines spaced 75 5-m), thanks to the photoimaging ability of the inorganic
system. In addition, since the polyimide/copper-on-silicon process seems to be
an attractive technology for the future, CMP is eager to propose the ES2
EHW400 process, as soon as it will be available. CMP will cooperate with CNRS-
IN2P3 Laboratories (Institut Nation- al de Physique Nuclaire et de Physique
des Particules). The fifteen laboratories are already equipped with the
ALLEGRO PCB software which is actually the core of ALLEGRO-MCM. CMP will also
cooperate with FRANCE Telecom, CNET, based in Mey- lan near Grenoble. FRANCE
Telecom is developing a polyimide/copper-on-silicon process. FRANCE Telecom
could supply technical support if a common interest is found between FRANCE
Telecom and the CMP User. CMP already serves universities, research
laboratories and SMIs as a broker for chip fabrication for a number of
technologies, presently CMOS and bi- polar, down to 1.25-micron. Since 1981,
some 60 institutions have been served from 20 countries and more than 1000
projects have been prototyped, and 10 semiconductor houses have been
interfaced. Page 23 ^L Page 24 CADENCE is the first EDA vendor to bring an MCM
design tool to market when it introduced ALLEGRO-MCM in 1990. ALLEGRO-MCM has
achieved immediate market acceptance including several technology development
contracts with IBM and the Microelectronics & Com- puter Consortium. As part
of the MCC contract, a group of 11 companies including Harris, DEC, HP,
Tandem, Kodak, Hughes, etc. have contributed to the development of the tool to
address issues of high-speed layout. DASSAULT ELECTRONIQUE has many years of
experience in the design and production of Multichip Modules for industrial
telecommunica- tion space and military markets. DASSAULT ELECTRONIQUE offer
CAD tools, transfers of in-house developed technology and various services in
the area of microelectronics (technology selection, modeling, simulation). It
also carries out the design and development of monolithic circuits : ASICs and
MMICs. DASSAULT ELECTRONIQUE has made key long term investments in em- erging
technology fields and has developed a large variety of packaging solutions
ranging from MCMs to dedicated microwave housing. Its "PCM" technology allowed
to deal with 350 MHz sig- nals on several lines, within its Rafale project on-
board Sys- tems. So far, with the PCM technology that DASSAULT ELECTRONIQUE
have been able to overcome all the problems that had to be faced. Since cost
is strongly depending on the application, it is diffi- cult to announce a mean
cost per inch-square. Nevertheless, con- sidering a "Sparc Module" featuring:
\- - Processors and cache-memory \- - 1 inch-square covered by chips \- - 2
inch-square ceramic module \- - 200 I/O (Standard Ceramic 228 I/O Flat Pack)
\- - 40 MHz operating clock \- - 7 W dissipation. The cost may range from
$31,000 to $67,000 for two prototypes, depending on wether you want to have
your module and chips tested or not. It is important to notice that the cost
of chips sets are not included ($3,000 per set) and that more than 50 % of the
fi- nal price is represented by fixed charges. This service is also available
to US Universities or Laboratories or Companies who might be interested. For
additional information, contact: B. COURTOIS CMP/EUROCHIP TIM3/IMAG/INPG 46,
Avenue Felix Viallet 38031 Grenoble Cedex FRANCE Tel: 33 76 57 46 15 Fax: 33
76 47 38 14 Email: courtois@archi.imag.fr Page 24 ^L Page 25 18.14 Proceedings
of 1992 IEEE Multichip Module Conference Available (Contributed by Paul
Wesling of the Tandem Corporation) This IEEE conference, held in Santa Cruz in
March of 1992, was attended by over 300 technologists involved in research,
design, and infrastructure development for MCM's. The focus was on multiple-
chip subsystems, including design and modeling tools, CAD improvements,
simulation, testability, systems implementation issues, reliability, and
thermal design. You may wish to get the Proceedings and look over the 48
technical papers yourself; a Table of Contents (and ordering information) are
available from Paul Wesling (E-mail: p.wesling@ieee.org). For your own copy,
send a check for $45 (for IEEE members) or $55 (non-members) made out to
"IEEE", to Paul Wesling; 12250 Saraglen Drive, Saratoga, CA 95070 USA. The
price includes surface shipment worldwide. 18.15 1992 Workshop on VLSI
Research and Education (April 9-10) (Contributed by Magdy Bayoumi of the Univ.
of SW Louisiana) U U SSSS L WORKSHOP on VLSI U U S L U U SSSS L Research and
Education U U S L UUU SSSS LLLL April 9 and 10, 1992 Workshop Chairman The
University of Southwestern Louisiana Magdy A. Bayoumi Conference Center,
Lafayette, Louisiana USL This is the first VLSI workshop to take place in
Advisory Committee Louisiana. It will provide a forum for communication among
educators, industrial representatives, D.W. Bouldin researchers, and
government sponsors in the area University of Tenneessee of microlectronic
systems. Experts from universities industry, and government will address the
current S.Y. Kung challenging issues in both VLSI education and Princeton
University research. Amr Mohsen The program features: Aptix Co. Invited
Lectures, Panel Discussion, Presentations Earl Swartzlander University of
Texas and addresses: Program Committee ** Current and Future Research Issues
** Advanced VLSI Curriculum M. Abdelguerfi ** Startin

