  
  

**HESP 300**

**_Introduction to Psycholinguistics_**

(C)![](wug.gif)

Fall 2000 Prof. Nan Bernstein Ratner

Tues - Thurs 12:30 - 1:45 Phone: 405-4213

Room: MMH 1400

Office hrs MWF 9:15-10 and by appt.

Office: 0100 Lefrak

E-mail: nratner@hesp.umd.edu

  
  

UTA office: 0133 Lefrak (office phone 405-4276, 405-4283)

UTAs:[](mailto:lelo78@aol.com)

Jessica Moran ([jesmoran@wam.umd.edu)](mailto:\(jesmoran@wam.umd.edu\)) home
phone: 301-405-0513

Kristina Kubistal
([tina0122@earthlink.net),](mailto:\(tina0122@earthlink.net\),) home phone
301-490-8595, office hrs T-Th 2-3:00

Chesney Bristol ([chesneyb@hotmail.com),](mailto:\(chesneyb@hotmail.com\),)
office hrs MWF 2-3

  
  

[](mailto:jloyd@wam.umd.edu)[](mailto:rcfish@wam.umd.edu)**Overview** :

The psychology of language examines such questions as: how does the mind
decode the speech signal? How are the meanings of words and sentences
accessed? How is speech planned and produced? What are the biological and
cognitive substrates of language acquisition and use? How are languages
learned? How does language processing interact with skills such as memory and
reading?

**Course text** :

J. Berko Gleason & N. B. Ratner (1998) (eds.) _Psycholinguistics (second
ed.)_. Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

**_Course requirements_** __:

There will be **three** non-cumulative **unit examinations** , each worth one-
quarter of your grade. The last examination will be held during Final
Examination week during the time indicated on your syllabus.

Examinations will assess content of both the assigned text and lectures, as
well as any films shown in class. Students who do not attend class regularly
will be at a serious disadvantage on examinations.

There is also **one** term **project**. The write-up of this project is due no
later than the final examination date; however, a **poster** of your project
is due by December 7. On December 7 and 12, students will share their poster
projects with the class and receive feedback on possible improvements that can
be made before the project is submitted for a grade.

\- Instructions for the project are on an attached page. The goal of the
project is to carry out a psycholinguistic or sociolinguistic experiment.
Sample projects are listed on your project guide as suggestions.

[ GO TO PROJECT GUIDELINES NOW ](PROJECT.HTM)

[ GO TO FIRST SAMPLE POSTER ](POSTER1.HTM)

[ Go TO THE SECOND SAMPLE POSTER ](poster2.htm)

[ GO TO THE THIRD SAMPLE POSTER ](poster3.htm)

[ GO TO THE FOURTH SAMPLE POSTER ](poster4.html)

[ GO TO THE FIFTH SAMPLE POSTER ](poster5.htm)

[ GO TO THE SIXTH SAMPLE POSTER ](poster6.htm)

\- Please consult the professor for approval of a project topic. This is for
your protection. The professor and TA's can provide helpful feedback about
whether or not your project is feasible and/or likely to earn a good grade.
**We are not responsible for bad grades earned for projects that were not
submitted to us for comment.**

\- You may work individually or in groups up to three members. For group
projects, you must additionally submit documentation of what each group member
contributed to the project.

\- Posters from previous semesters are available in the TA office (0133
Lefrak). Additionally, we will post electronic versions of a small number of
projects that earned high grades during prior semesters.

**Missed exam policy** :

If you must miss a scheduled examination, it is your responsibility to notify
the professor **in advance** to discuss your conflict and arrange an alternate
test date. Please speak to me or leave a message with the secretary on
405-4213. (This is a 24-hour timed and dated voice mail, and so there is
always a way to reach me.) Failure to notify the professor in advance of
missing an examination will result in a grade of F for that exam, unless other
acceptable, documented reason for missing the exam is submitted in a timely
fashion.

**Accommodation to special needs** :

If you have special needs, such as testing, seating, or religious or sports-
related attendance problems, please contact me as soon as possible. I am very
willing to accommodate special concerns of students if they I am made aware of
them in a timely fashion. Please do NOT wait until the day before a test to
inform me of such needs, as this interferes with my ability to make
appropriate accommodations.

  
  

**Academic honesty**

All student are expected to adhere to campus policy on academic dishonesty. In
particular, cheating on examinations and plagiarism or fabrication of data on
the poster project will result in immediate referral to the Student Honor
Council.

**Course resources** :

This course has three ** _undergraduate teaching assistants_**. **What they
can do for you** : They both keep office hours and will answer phone calls and
e-mail regarding class information and requirements. They can assist you in
clarifying concepts from lectures and readings. They will hold at least one
review class before each scheduled examinations. They can offer examples of
successful course projects from past semesters for you to look at in preparing
your poster and project. **What I do not expect them to do for you** : If you
are absent, do not expect me or the TAs to supply you with notes. You should
get them from a classmate. Ideally, if you expect an absence you CAN arrange
for a TA (or one of your friends) to tape the class.

This class will also operate a **_LISTSERV_** __. The address for this e-mail
list is[hesp300@bsoslist.umd.edu](mailto:hesp300@bsoslist.umd.edu) To join
this list and receive all the correspondence addressed to it, send a message
from your account addressed to: [join-hesp300@bsoslist.umd.edu](mailto:join-
hesp300@bsoslist.umd.edu) You don't need to put anything in the line for
subject, or in the body of the email, just a blank email to this address. When
you want to say something, just send the message to
[hesp300@bsoslist.umd.edu](mailto:hesp300@bsoslist.umd.edu) This list is for
posting of questions and answers regarding class content, or for observations
you feel might be of interest to people in a psycholinguistics class. We will
also post lecture outlines and other review/enrichment materials to this list.
Feel free to use it to ask questions or to answer them, if you feel you can do
so. We will monitor list use. We consider both asking AND answering questions
to be a form of active class participation, and will give extra-credit
consideration to active participants on the list. For this reason, the list is
not anonymous. If you do not wish to be identified, use an alias on your wam
account.

The class also has a **_website._ ** The address for the website is
<http://www.bsos.umd.edu/hesp/hesp300nbr/300syll.htm>

The website is an interactive version of the class syllabus that contains:
lecture dates and topics, class notes, text outlines and study guides, quizzes
that test text understanding, sample posters, and links to websites of
interest as we go through the course topics. We suggest that you bookmark it.
You may decide to print out notes BEFORE coming to class.

**Extra-credit:**

It is possible to earn extra credit in this class. To gain 5 points on your
lowest examination score, you may do either of the following:

1) Participate in a HESP psycholinguistic experiment. This semester, Dr. Henk
Haarmann[](mailto:Haarmann\(hhaarmann@bss1.umd.edu\)) is running a series of
psycholinguistic experiments that require participation from "normal" college
students (!). To participate, contact Christine Nagy-Tobler
([anagytobler@hesp.umd.edu).](mailto:\(anagytobler@hesp.umd.edu\).)
Participation takes approximately one hour and the study is conducted in
Lefrak Hall. Dr. Haarmann will verify participation and forward names to me.

2) Write a one-two page, single-spaced abstract and critique of a published
psycholinguistic experiment from one of the following journals: _Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research, Journal of Applied Psycholinguistics, Journal of
Memory and Language, Journal of Language and Cognitive Processes, Journal of
Child Language, Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America_. The article must
be no more than 5 years old. You must summarize the motivation for the study,
the study design, the study findings, and the study implications. You must
also attempt to identify weaknesses, possible areas for improvements and
future directions for this type of research.

**How to do well in this class:**

We have learned some interesting things and thought we would share them with
you. One is that some students believe that if a class website contains
lecture notes, there is no need to go to class. THIS IS VERY VERY WRONG. The
lecture notes are just outlines and are not substitutes for attending class.
If you do not come to class, you WILL do poorly on the tests.

A second belief is that if you can pass the sample quizzes that check on
textbook understanding, you will ace the class exams. THIS IS ALSO WRONG. I do
not lecture from the text. That would be boring for both of us. You need to
come to class to do well on exams.

**What type of learner are you?**

As you enter this class, you may wish to explore how you learn best. To take a
free test of learning styles, go to [http://www.crc4mse.org/ILS/Index.html
](http://www.crc4mse.org/ILS/Index.html)

and complete the survey there. Following the survey, you will be provided with
tips to maximize your learning style when faced with different kinds of
classes and instructors. Have fun!

  
  

**Syllabus of meeting dates, topics and readings (subject to change)** :

Aug 31 The domains of psycholinguistic inquiry; Review of basic linguistic
terminology and models;

Sept 5 The evolution of psycholinguistic research; Terminology and research
perspectives (continued)

_Unit readings_ : Chapter 1

[ GO TO LECTURE NOTES FOR THIS UNIT ](300intro.htm)

[ GO TO TEXT OUTLINE AND STUDY QUESTIONS FOR THIS UNIT ](WKBKCHAP1.HTM)

Sept. 7 Biological foundations of language; neurolinguistics.

Sept. 12 Biological foundations (continued)

Sept. 14 Biological foundations (continued)

_Unit reading_ : Chapter 2

[ GO TO LECTURE NOTES FOR THIS UNIT ](BRAIN&LANG.HTM)

[ GO TO TEXT OUTLINE AND STUDY QUESTIONS FOR THIS UNIT ](WKBKCHAP2.HTM)

Sept. 19 Speech perception

Sept. 21 Speech perception

_Unit reading_ : Chapter 3

Sept. 26 Speech perception (continued)

[ GO TO LECTURE NOTES FOR THIS UNIT ](SPEECHPERC.HTM)

[ GO TO TEXT OUTLINE AND STUDY QUESTIONS FOR THIS UNIT ](WKBKCHAP3.HTM)

Sept. 28 Your internal lexicon: the mental dictionary.

Oct. 3 **EXAM 1 (TUES)**

Oct. 5 Continue internal lexicon

Oct. 10 Continue internal lexicon

_Unit reading_ : Chapter 4

[ GO TO LECTURE NOTES FOR THIS UNIT ](300LEX.HTM)

[ GO TO TEXT OUTLINE AND STUDY QUESTIONS FOR THIS UNIT ](chap4.htm)

Oct. 12 Sentence comprehension and memory

Oct. 17 Sentence comp & memory (continued)

Oct. 19 Sentence comprehension and memory (continued)

_Unit reading_ : Chapter 5

[ GO TO LECTURE NOTES FOR THIS UNIT ](sentproc.htm)

[ GO TO TEXT OUTLINE AND STUDY QUESTIONS FOR THIS UNIT ](chap5.htm)

  
  

Oct. 24 Sociolinguistics, genderlect, dialectal variation

Oct. 26 Sociolinguistics; Discourse

[ GO TO LECTURE NOTES FOR THIS TOPIC ](sociolin.htm)

_Unit reading_ : Chapter 6

[ GO TO TEXT OUTLINE AND STUDY QUESTIONS FOR THIS UNIT ](CHAP6.HTM)

Oct. 31 Continue discourse; Language and thought

Nov. 2 **Exam II** (THURS.)

[](SPPROD.HTM)Nov. 7 Speech production

_Unit reading_ : Chapter 7

[ GO TO TEXT OUTLINE AND STUDY QUESTIONS FOR THIS UNIT ](CHAP7.HTM)

[ GO TO NOTES FOR THIS UNIT ](SPPROD.htm)

Nov. 9 Speech production (continued)

Nov. 14 Speech production (continued)

Nov. 16 Topic to be announced

Nov. 21 Language acquisition

_Unit reading:_ Chapter 8

[ GO TO LECTURE NOTES FOR THIS UNIT ](lanacq.htm)

[ GO TO TEXT OUTLINE AND STUDY QUESTIONS FOR THIS UNIT ](CHAP8.HTM)

Nov. 23 No Class (Thanksgiving)

Nov. 28 Language acquisition (continued)

Nov. 30 Language acquisition (continued)

Dec. 5 Bilingualism, second language learning

_Unit reading_ : Chapter 10

[ GO TO LECTURE NOTES FOR THIS UNIT ](biling.htm)

[ GO TO TEXT OUTLINE AND STUDY QUESTIONS FOR THIS UNIT ](chap10.htm)

Dec. 7 Poster session day 1 (Location TBA)

Dec. 12 Poster session day 2

Dec. 19 ( **8-10 am) -- FINAL EXAM** ; **All posters DUE.**

  
  

**SOME INTERNET RESOURCES TO EXPLORE**

At last check, these sites were active. Most contain links to numerous
additional sites. Please let me know of any inactive sites or possible typos
on my part. The name of the page follows the URL to allow you to search it if
there are problems with the address given.

**_Linguistics:_** __

<http://www.linguistic-funland.com/> (The Linguistic funland)

_<http://ldap.bangor.ac.uk/ling/sources/sources.html> (Sources)_

<http://www.lunacow.com/linguistics/>_[](http://www.tsoft.net/~lisae/linguistics.html)(Language
is my Life)_

_Linguistics projects:<http://www.emich.edu/~linguist/projects.html>
(Linguistics Projects from the Linguistics List)_

  
  

**_Psycholinguistics (databases, general):_** __

_[](http://snow.utoronto.ca/Learn2/languag2.htm)Neuropsychology Central:_

<http://www.neuropsychologycentral.com/>

  
  

[](http://www/premier.net/~cogito/neuropsy.html)**_Brain imaging_** _:_

_<http://weber.u.washington.edu/~chudler/image.html> (Brain imaging)_

[](http://www.sfn.org/briefings/brain-
imaging.html)_<http://www.sfn.org/briefings/> (Society for Neuroscience
briefings on brain imaging)_

including a briefing on gender differences in brain organization at:
<http://www.sfn.org/briefings/gender.brain.html>

Visit an imaging tutorial at
<http://psyserver.pc.rhbnc.ac.uk/vision/demo/demo.html>

For information on split-brain functioning, see http://www-
news.ucdavis.edu/PubComm/newsreleases/11.96/news_leftywriting.html

also: <http://www.indiana.edu/~pietsch/callosum.html>

<http://www.indiana.edu/~pietsch/split-brain.html>

Learn more about aphasia at <http://www.aphasia.org/index.html>

Surf the human body at the Visible Human Project:
<http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/visible/visible_human.html>

  
  

**_Speech perception/recognition:_** __

A tutorial on acoustic phonetics and spectrograms
http://cslu.cse.ogi.edu/tutordemos/SpectrogramReading/spectrogram_reading.html

If the above link doesn't work, get to it from Resources for Studying Human
Speech, below, at Center for Spoken Language Understanding.

_<http://www.scottrell.com/Speech/index.html> (Speech recognition website)_

_Resources for Studying Human
Speech:_<http://weber.u.washington.edu/~dillon/PhonResources.html>

_<http://www.ling.lu.se/research/speechtutorial/tutorial.html> (Speech
analysis tutorial)_

_<http://fonsg3.let.uva.nl/Other_pages.html> (Speech on the Web)_

Speech research links on the web: <http://mambo.ucsc.edu/psl/speech.html>

_<http://www.research.att.com/~mjm/cgi-bin/voices.cgi> (ATT Speech Synthesis)_

Peter Jusczyk's research on infant speech processing at
<http://europe.cnn.com/TECH/9701/22/t_t/babies.birds/>

More infant speech perception research at: Human Frontier Science
Program[](http://www.ehess.fr/centres/lscip/misc/hfsp/html)
<http://www.hfsp.org>

  
  

**_Syntax/discourse:_** __

_Try your hand at translation:_<http://babelfish.altavista.com/translate.dyn>

[](http://babelfish.altavista.digital.com/cgi-bin/translate?)_The Intelligent
Essay Grader (Latent Semantic Analysis):<http://www-psych.nmsu.edu/essay/>_

  
  

**_Memory and language_** __: Read George Miller's original article on the
Magic Number Seven Plus or Minus Two
at:<http://www.well.com/user/smalin/miller.html>

  
  

**_Speech production:_** __

_The Filled Pause Web
Page:<http://www.cisnet.or.jp/home/rlrose/pause/Default.htm>_

  
  

**_Child Language:_** __

_The Child Language Data Exchange System
(CHILDES):_<http://childes.psy.cmu.edu>

[](http://poppy.psy.cmu.edu/childes/)_The Communication Analyzer User's Guide
(a guide to analyzing kiddie language):_

_[http://www.ultranet.com/~finnerty/Canv012.htm#mean length of
utterance](http://www.ultranet.com/~finnerty/Canv012.htm#mean)_

Explore current research in infant speech/language perception at :
<http://europe.cnn.com/TECH/9701/22/t_t/babies.birds/>

  
  

**_How to research your psycholinguistics topic:_** __

_PubMed:<http://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/PubMed/> (Welcome to PubMed)_

  
  

**_How to conceptualize your project:_** __

_A guide to Science Fair
Projects:<http://www.isd77.k12.mn.us/resources/cf/SciProjInter.html>_

[

](http://www.isd77.k12.mn.us/resources/cf/SciProjInter.html)_Research Methods:
Social and Behavioral Sciences: (Virtual Psychology Library)_ :

<http://www.library.miami.edu/netguides/psymeth.html>

  
  

_[](Http://www.library.miami.edu/staff/lmc/psymeth.html)**How to write up your
poster/paper:**_

[ The department guide, on our web page](http://www.bsos.umd.edu/hesp)

__[An APA style guide ](http://webster.commnet.edu/apa/apa_index.htm)

_<http://physics.gac.edu/~huber/misc/wricheck.html>_

  
  

**_Just for fun: language humor_** __

_<http://www.ling.upenn.edu/~beatrice/humor/>_

  
  

**SUGGESTED PROJECTS**

  
  

The project selections below are suggestions to help you in designing your own
mini-project. For the project you eventually decide to do, please follow these
guidelines:

  
  

1) In an **introductory section** , please describe the aspect of language
knowledge or processing that you are investigating. YOU MUST CONSULT AT LEAST
THREE (3) REFERENCES OTHER THAN YOUR TEXT IN DESCRIBING YOUR TOPIC AREA OR
PROJECT. Please reference these sources on your poster or in an accompanying
paper, using APA citation style (the style used in your text). These
references must be PRIMARY references (articles or chapters on the topic, not
general texts on language or child language). No more than ONE reference may
be from the World Wide Web, unless approved by the professor.

2) Identify variables that you will study. In a research investigation, the
independent variable is the variable that you, the researcher control in some
way (such as the level of complexity of items to be remembered, the speech
rate at which your subject will be required to talk, etc.) The dependent
variable is the variable you will measure (such as number of items remembered,
correct responses, errors, etc.). Sometimes a study will have more than one
independent variable (such as adding gender and/or age to the examples listed
above).

3) Develop a **hypothesis to be tested**. A hypothesis is a yes/no question
that can be answered by the results of your experiment. Examples might be: Do
men and women differ in their ability to remember high- and low-frequency
lexical items? Do male and female infants receive different types of input
from adults? (See if you can reword some of the research area suggestions
below into possible hypotheses.)  Make sure you can define your variables in
some usable way: The hypothesis that men and women talk differently contains
one well-defined and one poorly defined variable. How will you measure the
notion "talk differently"?

4) Develop and fully explain the method by which you will obtain an answer to
your hypothesis. Use a minimum of **10 subjects** for your project (some
projects, such as single subject projects, are exempt from this requirement.
Please see the professor). Carefully detail the ages, sex, and educational and
language backgrounds of your subjects.

5) Explain your method clearly and carefully. Attach copies of any assignments
or stimuli you used.

I should be able to fully understand what you did by reading your poster.

6) Table and summarize your results. Use graphs or charts as appropriate to
make the information clear to the reader of your poster. (Tips: Means are
easier to appreciate than lists of individual data, although both should be
provided. Be sure that raw data are proportioned if necessary, if each subject
provides different numbers of responses or provides different sample sizes for
analysis. IF YOU ARE ABLE, perform a simple statistical analysis of your
results: were any differences you observed statistically significant?)

7) Conclusion and discussion. What conclusions did you reach? Were your
results what you expected? Would you make any changes if you were to re-do the
project?

  
  

**GRADING RUBRIC FOR POSTERS:**

  
  

Introduction (15 points)

\- short review of pertinent literature on topic

\- at least three primary references are cited (no more than one from
Internet; none are general texts).

\- a hypothesis is stated

\- the hypothesis is clear and follows from the review of the topic

Method (30 points)

\- minimum of 10 subjects were used (unless professor approved a lesser
number)

\- relevant characteristics of subjects are summarized

\- stimuli and instructions are clearly described; examples are given on
poster

\- copies of all materials used in study are attached

\- tasks are appropriate to hypothesis

\- independent variables (experimental conditions) and/or subject grouping
variables described

\- dependent variable is operationally defined and described

Results (20 points)

\- Findings clearly summarized; average data from groups and/or conditions are
reported

\- Data are proportioned, if necessary

\- Results are graphed, with appropriate graph layout (clearly identified,
labeled, scaled x- and y-axes)

\- Findings are interpreted in light of original hypothesis: was it supported?

Discussion and conclusion (15 points)

\- Conclusion clearly stated and relevant to original hypotheses

\- Conclusion is supported by the data

\- Were results expected?

\- What might you do differently next time? What might be an appropriate next
study?

Presentation (10)

\- Poster is neat and clear

\- Writing is free of spelling and grammatical errors

\- References are in APA format

(Note: consult the department writing guide, available on the HESP website,
for guidance)

Creativity/Innovation (10)

\- Creative topic or approach

\- Results not obvious without doing the experiment, not a "duh" hypothesis,
such as "Kids know fewer words than adults."

  
  

**POSSIBLE TOPICS**

  
  

1) What does a typical speaker-hearer know about his/her language?

a) Using Mark Bernstein's "Chair" study, or William Labov's "glass/cup" study
as guides, probe what features speakers use to identify an object.

b) How much do adults understand the derivational morphology of their
language? Using nonsense words, probe speakers' attempts to add derivational
affixes. Use the class assignment as a guideline.

c) What makes a natural phonological sequence in English? Probe adult
responses to nonsense words of differing phonological structure.

d) How well can adults explain their linguistic knowledge? Ask subjects to
judge, correct and EXPLAIN what rules have been broken in a list of
ungrammatical sentences of English. Or ask adults how you make a particular
sentence type of English, such as question, negative or passive.

e) Explore the pragmatic conventions of language. Ask adults to describe what
makes an utterance polite or rude.

  
  

2) Developmental aspects of language use.

a) Using children of different ages, compare their performance on some task
involving knowledge of English phonology, morphology, semantics, syntax,
pragmatics. Use the research in the text chapter on language acquisition as a
guide.

b) How does children's metalinguistic knowledge compare to adults?

c) How well can children appreciate linguistic humor?

d) What do children's earliest communicative attempts look like?

  
  

3) Speech production

a) Describe patterns of fluency and disfluency in spontaneous language.

b) See if you can induce a corpus of speech errors. What do they look like?

c) Does fluency change under varying speaking conditions?

  
  

4) Memory and language

a) what variables affect memory for linguistic stimuli?

b) what do recall/recognition errors tell us about the nature of memory or the
nature of mnemonic strategies?

  
  

5) Sentence processing

a) are some sentences easier or harder to process or recall? Why?

6) Sociolinguistics

a) How do men and women differ in language use?

b) how do regional dialects vary phonologically, lexically, syntactically and
pragmatically?

c) How does dialect use affect listener perceptions of a speaker?

d) Describe a particular registeral variation

  
  

7) Speech perception

a) Video tape a speaker and transcribe the speech sample. Have volunteers
attempt to "lip read" the sample (viewing without sound) Describe your
results.

b) If you have access to a word-recognition program (i.e., language tutorials
for home PC's) examine conditions under which the program works well and
poorly.

  
  

8) Second language learning

a) How do second language learner's errors reflect either interference from
their first language or normal child language acquisition strategies?

b) How do second language learners differ from English-speaking children and
adults in morphologically inflecting nonsense words, judging well-formedness,
or explaining grammatical rules?

c) How are foreign accents perceived by native speakers? How does a particular
accent affect listener perceptions?

  
  

THESE ARE MERELY SUGGESTIONS; you are invited to use your imagination and
develop other projects. For best feedback from me, briefly write your proposal
on a card or sheet of paper and hand them to me by April 15. I will return
them to you with comments and suggestions. This is an opportunity to get
feedback on your topic and approach, and maximizes your potential for a good
grade on the assignment.

  
  

* * *

* * *

