  **DSS 301/600: NUCLEAR STRATEGY & U.S. NATIONAL SECURITY POLICY**  
Dr. C. Dale Walton

PACB 222

(417) 836-6573

Spring 2002:

11-12:15 TUE+THU

PACB 206  
    


**Purpose**

This course will examine U.S. strategic thought and policies in the areas of
defense and arms control since the Second World War, focusing particularly on
the U.S.-Soviet competition. It will review, examine, and critique American
deterrence and defense concepts and policies, major U.S. weapons programs, and
the theory and practice of arms control. Strong emphasis will be placed on the
relationship between various strategic theories, fundamental approaches to
strategic doctrine, nuclear weapons issues, U.S.-Soviet strategic relations,
and comparative U.S.-Soviet/Russian approaches to strategy. Arms control will
be primarily examined as an aspect of the U.S.-Soviet (and Russian) strategic
competition.

The course has no prerequisites, but some background in international
relations, U.S. foreign policy or diplomatic history, and U.S.-Soviet
relations is desirable. Students may acquire this general knowledge on their
own during the course. This is, therefore, a course on strategy and national
security, both its development and contemporary issues and problems. It is not
a general course in international relations, foreign policy, or the history of
the Cold War.

The attached topic outline is intended to serve as a flexible guide rather
than a rigid schedule. Changes will be introduced where necessary to cover
more thoroughly the subjects of particular interest to the class. Unless
alterations are announced during the semester, however, reading assignments
will be completed in accordance with the listed sequence.  
    


**Requirements**

_All Students_ :

(1) Faithful class attendance is the first requirement. Class lectures and
discussions will constitute the primary "text" for the class. Missing class
would put a student at a disadvantage, and would also be grounds for a lower
grade. _There may be pop quizzes on reading material and lectures._

(2) There will be a mid-term exam. Both the undergraduate and graduate final
exams will be take-home, open book, open note. Students will have
approximately one week to complete the exam.

(3) There will be a final exam. Both the undergraduate and graduate final
exams will be take-home, open book, open note.

(4) The instructor will consider student proposals for term papers in lieu of
the final exam. Paper proposals must be submitted by Thursday, February 14.
Recommended length of term papers is approximately 15 pages for
undergraduates, 25 pages for graduate students.

_Graduate Students_ :

Graduate students will be expected to demonstrate a greater command of the
literature in written exams and in class.

All term or seminar papers will be due the last day of regularly scheduled
class. Late papers will be penalized.

**Required and Recommended Reading**

Required:

(1) Course Reader: A reader of articles and excerpts from official speeches
and documents, arranged by topic to conform with the schedule of lectures is
assembled in the DSS library and is available for copying.

(2) Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to the Congress, current issue.
Students should familiarize themselves with current defense policies, programs
and the budget. This available free on the internet at
<http://www.defenselink.mil/pubs>

(3) Other readings as Assigned: The instructor may assign additional reading
for particular lectures. Students will be informed of this requirement in
advance. Copies of the materials will be available in the department library.  


Recommended:

Keith B. Payne, _Deterrence in the Second Nuclear Age_

John Lewis Gaddis, _Strategies of Containment_

Leonard Spector, et. al. _Tracking Nuclear Proliferation_

Colin Gray, _Nuclear Strategy and Strategic Planning_ or _Strategic Studies
and Public Policy_

John Dziak, _Soviet Perceptions of Military Power: The Interaction of Theory
and Practice_

Richard Starr, _The New Military in Russia_

William T. Lee and Richard Staar, eds., _Soviet Military Policy Since World
War II_

Richard Staar, ed., _Arms Control: Myth vs. Reality_

Patrick Glynn, _Closing Pandora's Box_

Colin S. Gray, _Modern Strategy_  


Background Reading:

Adam Ulam, _Expansion and Coexistence_

Bernard and Fawn M. Brodie, _From Crossbow to H-Bomb_

Colin S. Gray, _The Geopolitics of the Nuclear Era_

Henry Kissinger, _Diplomacy_

Eugene V. Rostow, _Breakfast with Bonaparte_

**Policies**

Grades will be determined by class attendance, quality of work on exams, and
demonstration of effort (readings, outside study and the like) in class and on
exams and papers. I do not grade on a curve. If everyone deserves an "A"
everyone gets one. Studying and working with other students is encouraged.
Plagiarism, either of another's work or of any scholarly, written or
electronic resource, will result in an automatic failing grade.

Make-up for tests will be allowed only in the case of illness or family
emergency. It is the student's responsibility to contact me before the due
date of the exam to arrange for a make-up. An incomplete for the course will
only be granted in the most extreme circumstances.

Students with disabilities that need special consideration should contact me
as soon as possible at the beginning of the semester.  


**General Course Outline**

_Topic_

Course Introduction; The Study of Strategy

Basic Terminology & Concepts, Nuclear Weapons

U.S. Defense Policy, 1945-60: Containment, Massive Retaliation & Extended
Deterrence

The McNamara Years: Ann Arbor to MAD

Safeguard, ABM & Strategic Sufficiency

SALT I: U.S.-Soviet Strategic Arms Control

Changes in the 1970s: Strategy, Soviet Threat, & SALT II

The Reagan Decade: Strategy, Arms Control & Treaty Compliance

SDI & its Implications

New Nuclear Issues: Proliferation & Counterproliferation

The Ongoing BMD Debate

Strategy, Politics, & U.S. Military Requirements in the 21st century  


[Other Important Information](equal.htm)

