![](daruma.gif)**  GFIR 572: JAPAN IN WORLD AFFAIRS (Spring 2002)**  
**   [ http://toolkit.virginia.edu/cgi-
local/tk/UVa_CLAS_2002_Spring_GFIR572-1](http://toolkit.virginia.edu/cgi-
local/tk/UVa_CLAS_2002_Spring_GFIR572-1) ( _password: schoppa_ )**  
**    MW 2:00-3:15 in Cabell 320**

Prof. Len Schoppa  
Office: Cabell 148 (tel: 924-3211)  
Hrs: MW 3:30 - 4:30 (or appt)  
e-mail: [schoppa@virginia.edu](mailto:ljs2k@virginia.edu)  


Today the world's system of international relations is in flux. The end of the
Cold War, which until 1990 had provided for an amazing degree of continuity in
the security relations of the United States, Japan, and other major powers
during the postwar period, has forced all nations to reevaluate their foreign
policies.  At the same time, the rise of China's economic and military power
relative to both the United States and Japan has raised concerns about whether
the two nations can accommodate this newcomer in a way that sustains the
postwar liberal international economic order and peace in the region.

In both of these areas of flux, Japan is playing and will continue to play a
crucial role.  With military spending near the top of the international league
tables, Japan holds the _potential_ to alter the balance of power in the East
Asian region, depending on whether it agrees to reorient the U.S.-Japan
alliance toward a new effort to contain China, instead supports efforts to
engage China in a new collective security framework, or tilts toward China.
A continuing allergy to discussing security policy within the domestic
political arena, however, has thus far delayed any systematic reconsideration
of Japan's alliance policy.

Similarly, the nation's wealth has given it the _ability_ to play an important
role in the maintenance of the system of liberal economic relations. Japan's
domestic institutions, however, have thus far seemed oriented more toward
exploiting (rather than maintaining) that system. Japan spent much of the
1980s and early 1990s trying to resist U.S. pressure to genuinely open up its
economy to international competition.   In the last few years, faced with new
competition from China, it has erected protectionist barriers against imports
from that country.  Struggling to escape from a decade of economic stagnation,
Japan stands at a crossroads wondering whether it should continue trying to
protect its declining economic sectors or give up this fight and accelerate
its structural reforms by throwing open its doors to international
competition.

This combination of developments means that, more than ever in the postwar
period, the whole basis of Japanese foreign policy (the U.S.-Japan alliance
and free riding on the liberal economic order) is being questioned. How will
Japan respond? Will it fundamentally rethink its alliance strategy? Will it
play a leadership role in helping to sustain the liberal economic role in the
face of China's economic challenge?  These questions make it more important
than ever for Americans to improve their understanding of Japanese foreign
policy. It is the aim of this course to provide you with a basis for improving
your understanding of Japan's place in world affairs.

_Requirements_ :

This class will begin with a series of lectures designed to introduce you to
the historical, domestic, and international context which shape contemporary
Japanese foreign policy. A midterm, based on the readings and lectures up to
that point, will account for 40% of your final grade. The second half of the
course will be comprised of a series of discussions on contemporary issues in
Japan's international relations. During this phase of the course, individual
students will be assigned to lead each discussion, but all students will be
expected to do the core readings for each week and participate in the
discussions. To help make sure you come to these sessions prepared, there will
be a series of five pop quizes on these readings. Students will then write
term papers on an aspect of the topic covered in their oral presentations.
Each student's grade for this half of the course, which in total is worth 60%
of the final grade, will be based on four components weighted as follows:
overall participation (20), quiz grades (20), an oral presentation (20), and a
final paper (40). The final paper (due April 29) should be 18-25 pages in
length.

Graduate students may choose to complete all of these assignments, weighted as
described, OR they may opt out of the midterm and oral presentation in favor
of preparing a longer (30 page) and more theoretical paper on a topic I
approve.  These students' grades will be weighted as follows: final paper
(50%), quizzes (25%), and participation (25%).  Grad students choosing this
option should meet with Mr. Schoppa _in the first week of classes_ to make
this arrangement and begin discussing paper topic ideas with him.

Specific instructions regarding how to prepare for your class presentations
and how to research, organize, and write your term paper are available via a
link off the web version of the syllabus--just click
[here](http://www.people.Virginia.EDU/~ljs2k/ir572paper.html).

_Readings_ :

Assigned readings are a very important part of the course. Much of the reading
(especially for the first part of the class) will come from books available at
the book store. Other readings (marked with a *) will be available in PDF
format for you to print off the web at the following address
(<https://toolkit.virginia.edu/cgi-local/tk/UVa_CLAS_2002_Spring_GFIR572-1>),
open to any class member who goes to this page, lists his userid as "student"
and enters the password "schoppa".  You will find the materials listed by
author in alphabetical order  under "materials."

Since large parts of the following books are required reading for the course,
the following books are available at the bookstore:

John W. Dower, _Embracing Defeat: Japan in the Wake of World War II_ (W.W.
Norton, 1999).

Kenneth B. Pyle, _The Japanese Question: Power and Purpose in a New Era., 2nd
ed._ (Washington, D.C.: AEI Press, 1997).

Gerald L. Curtis, _New Perspectives on U.S.-Japan Relations_ (Tokyo: JCIE,
2000).  


**SCHEDULE AND ASSIGNMENTS**

**A. Introduction** (1/16)

**B. The Historical Context for Japan's Postwar Foreign Policy**

1\. **Japan Becomes a "Great Power"** (1/21)

*Michael Barnhardt, "From Perry to Empire," _Japan and the World Since 1868_ (London: Edward Arnold, 1995): 5-20.

Dower, _Embracing Defeat_ , 19-84.

2\. **Imperialism and World War II** (1/23  & 28)

*Essay by James B. Crowley in Crowley, ed., _Modern East Asia: Essays in Interpretation_ (New York: Harcourt, Brace, and World, 1970): 235-263.

Dower, _Embracing Defeat_ , 87-273.

Additional reading for graduate students: Jack Snyder, _Myths of Empire:
Domestic Politics and International Ambition_ (Ithaca: Cornell University
Press, 1991): 112-152.

3. **Defeat & Cold War Shape Japan's Postwar Foreign Policy** (1/30 & 2/4)

Pyle, _The Japanese Question_ , pp. 3-41.

Dower, _Embracing Defeat_ , 277-440, 525-564.

**C. The Domestic Context for Japan's Postwar Foreign Policy**

1\. **Pacifism and Nationalism** (2/6  & 11)

Pyle, _The Japanese Question_ , pp. 42-64.

*Robert D. Putnam, "Diplomacy and Domestic Politics: the Logic of Two-Level Games," _International Organization_ 42:3 (Summer 1988): 427-460.

*Igarashi Takeshi, "Peace-Making and Party Politics: The Formation of the Domestic Foreign- Policy System in Postwar Japan," _Journal of Japanese Studies_ 11:2 (Summer 1985): 323-56.

*Masaru Tamamoto, "Japan's Search for a World Role," _World Policy Journal_ 7:3 (Summer 1990): 493-520.

Additional reading for graduate students: Peter J. Katzenstein, _Cultural
Norms and National Security: Police and Military in Postwar Japan_ (Ithaca:
Cornell University Press).

2\. **Protectionism and Internationalism** (2/13 & 18)

Pyle, _The Japanese Question_ , pp. 65-120.

*T.J. Pempel, "Structural _Gaiatsu_ : International Finance and Political Change in Japan," _Comparative Political Studies_ 32:8 (December 1999): 907-932.

3\. **The Domestic Institutions** (2/20  & 25)

*Peter F. Cowhey, "Domestic Institutions and the Credibility of International Commitments: Japan and the United States," _International Organization_ 47:2 (Spring 1993): 299-326.

*Steve Vogel, "Can Japan Disengage? Winner and Losers in Japan's Political Economy, and the Ties that Bind Them," _Social Science Japan Journal_ 2:1 (1999), pp. 3-21.

*Marshall Zeringue and Daniel Kritenbrink, "Japanese Security Policy in a Changing International Environment," _Defense Analysis_ 10:2 (1994), pp. 113-140.

**D. The International Context**

1\. **The Economic Context** (2/27  & 3/4)

Gerald Curtis chapter in Curtis, ed., _New Perspectives_ , pp. 1-38.

Robert Uriu chapter in Curtis, ed., _New Perspectives_ , pp. 213-240.

*Chalmers Johnson, "The Pattern of Japanese Relations with China, 1952-1982," _Pacific Affairs_ 59:3 (Fall 1986): 402-428.

2\. **The Stratetic Context** (3/6)

Pyle, _The Japanese Question_ , pp. 121-177.

*Kenneth Waltz, "Structural Realism after the Cold War," _International Security_ 25:1 (Summer 2000): 5-41.

*Aaron Friedberg, "Introduction," _Strategic Asia_ (Seattle: NBR, 2001): 1-25.

**_MIDTERM: March 18_**  


**PART II: TOPICS IN CONTEMPORARY JAPANESE FOREIGN RELATIONS**

**1\. Japan's Trade Disputes with the United States and China** (3/20)

Bullock chapter in Curtis, ed., _New Perspectives_ , pp. 39-81.

James Brooke, ["Tokyo Fears China May Put an End to 'Made in
Japan',"](http://www.people.virginia.edu/~ljs2k/china-japan01.htm) _New York
Times_ , November 20, 2001.

Additional Reading for graduate students: Leonard Schoppa, _Bargaining with
Japan: What American Pressure Can and Cannot Do_ (New York: Columbia
University Press, 1997).

**_NO CLASS ON MARCH 25_**

**2\. Macroeconomic Policy Coordination** (3/27)

Both Kojo chapters in Curtis, ed., _New Perspectives_ , pp. 129-174.

**3\. Japan's Security Strategy** (4/1)

Green chapter in Curtis, ed., _New Perspectives_ , pp. 241-264.

**4\. Japan & The United Nations **(4/3)

*Aurelia George Mulgan, "International Peacekeeping and Japan's Role," _Asian Survey_ 35:12 (December 1995): 1102-1117.

**5\. Japan & Asia: the Security Dimension** (4/8)

*Aaron L. Friedberg, "Will Europe's Past Be Asia's Future," _Survival_ 42:3 (Autumn 2000): 147-160.

*Thomas J. Christensen, "China, the U.S.-Japan Alliance, and the Security Dilemma in East Asia," _International Security_ 23:4 (Spring 1999): 49-80.

Data on the economic and military power of Asian nations can be found in the
_Strategic Asia_ Appendix, available on the web at
<http://strategicasia.nbr.org/Report/pdf/2001-2002/appendix.pdf>.

**6\. Japan & Asia: the Economic Dimension** (4/10)

*David P. Rapkin, "The United States, Japan, and the power to block: the APEC and AMF cases," _The Pacific Review_ 14:3 (2001): 373-410.

**7\. Japan's Aid Policy** (4/15)

*Steven W. Hook and Guang Zhang, "Japan's Aid Policy Since the Cold War: Rhetoric and Reality," _Asian Survey_ 38 (November 1998): 1051-1066.

**8\. Sino-Japanese Relations** (4/17)

*Michael Green and Benjamin Self, "Japan's Changing China Policy," _Survival_ 38:2 (Summer 1996): pp. 35-58.

**9\. Japan's Relations with the Koreas** (4/22)

*Christopher Hughes, "Japanese Policy and the North Korean 'Soft Landing,'" _The Pacific Review_ 11:3 (1998): 389-415.

**10\. Russo-Japanese Relations** (4/24)

*Rajan Menon, "Japan-Russia Relations and Northeast Asian Security," _Survival_ 38:2 (Summer 1996): 59-78.

**11\. Summing up or Topic of Student Choice** (4/29)  


**FINAL PAPER DUE (Monday, April 29th, at the end of class)**  


**_PROF. SCHOPPA'S CLASS RULES_**

1\. MISSED TESTS: You should notify me before the midterm if, for some reason,
you will not be able to make it on that date. Permission will only be given in
exceptional cases, and make-ups will be scheduled either before or after the
regularly scheduled date--at professor's convenience.

2\. LATE PAPERS: The final grade on the paper will be docked one letter unit
for every day it is late unless the delay has been approved by me (based on a
very good reason) at least a week before the due date. Last minute computer
problems are not an excuse!!! Back-up your work on disks to avoid losing it,
and leave time for you to deal with last minute hitches (like a broken
printer, a line in the computer lab) by aiming to finish well before the
deadline.

