Date: Thu, 14 Sep 1995 09:08:08 -0400 From: Shelly J Birnie-lefcovitch
sbirniel@UOGUELPH.CA Subject: Re: A Quick Organizational Structure Survey
Jan's suggestion that responses to Marty's inquiry be posted to the list is a
good one. I too would like to learn more about how others are organizing units
that combine responsibility for both academic programs and student services
directed at first year students. My original message to Marty follows...shelly
Further to your inquiry, the University of Guelph (Ontario, Canada) recently
created (May '94) such a department. It is called the Office of First Year
Studies (OFYS). It's two co-directors (one a faculty member, the other a
student affairs professional) report jointly to the two Associate Vice-
Presidents Academic and Student Affairs, both of whom are located in the
Office of the Provost/Vice President Academic. In addition, a first year
studies sub-committe of our Board of Undergradute Studies (responsible for the
undergraduate curriculum) has been established. This sub-committee can discuss
and make recommendations on virtually any matter having to do with first year
courses and programs. Also, the two co-directors are members of the Student
Affairs Directors Group. I hope this information is helpful...Shelly Birnie-
Lefcovitch Co-Director, Office of First Year Studies University of Guelph
Guelph, Ontario, Canada N1G 2W1 email address: sbirniel@uoguelph.ca telephone:
(519) 824-4120, ext.3609 FAX: (519) 763-5244
=========================================================================
Date: Thu, 14 Sep 1995 08:40:43 -0800 From: Marty Takimoto
takimoto@UCLINK.BERKELEY.EDU Subject: Survey on Coordinated Orientation/First
Year Courses Thanks to all of you who responded to my survey so far. Some
preliminary findings: As anticipated, the results have been mixed depending
upon the size, nature, and (of course) politics of a particular campus. I've
received responses from thirty colleges and universities so far and seven
institutions have indicated they have orientation programs and first year
courses administered from the same office. Not surprisingly, on most campuses,
orientation programs and services are run through Student Affairs and first
year courses through Academic Affairs. On campuses where these services are
centralized, most of the offices are located under Academic Affairs. Thank you
all again for your responses. I'll try to post my final findings next week.
Best, Martin Takimoto Director, Office of New Student Programs Director, Cal
Student Orientation (CalSO) Program 137 Golden Bear Center University of
California Berkeley, CA 94720-2440 Phone: 510/642-0622 Email:
takimoto@uclink.berkeley.edu FAX: 510/642-9078
=========================================================================
Date: Thu, 14 Sep 1995 06:00:00 -DLST From: Tom Schrautemeier
TSCHRAUTEMEIER@CHUCK.STCHAS.EDU Organization: St. Charles County Community
College Subject: Videos for COL 101 I teach a COL 101 course of 20 students at
a mid-sized community college. All my class members are betwee 18 and 20. I
seem to be having a hard time connecting with this group. I have taught this
course two other times and I seemed to naturally bond with the group. In this
class I have unresponsive silent students, class clowns, and a few quiet
students who would rather be sleeping. Since this is the video generation, I
thought I might try a video with some small group discussion afterwards. Do
you successfully use any videos in your class. I'm open to any suggestions. I
even thought of showing a commercial video such as Dead Poet's Society. HELP!
Tom Schrautemeier Academic Advisor TSchrautemeier@Chuck.Stchas.Edu
=========================================================================
Date: Thu, 14 Sep 1995 13:44:32 CDT From: Norris F. Manning, Academic Advising
NMANNIN@SIUE.EDU Subject: Videos for COL 101 Dear Friends This semester in our
University 112 course, we viewed a video which was very relevant to a topic
that we had for the week. It was Common Threads--it traces five people whose
lives were touched by AIDS and their response to their loved ones' deaths
(making a panel for the Names project). The video is moving and sparked a
discussion the likes of which I have NEVER witnessed--the topic is relevant
and very personal to some people in our class. It was effective in moving us
to discussions and toward creating a bond in the class. Dead Poet's society is
a GOOD MOVIE. What would be the discussion to follow--what is the overriding
point of the movie and the relevance to the students in your class?? Questions
which deserve some thought before you choose to view. Our students wanted to
view HIGHER LEARNING, which is an effective movie in sparking discussion on
race and hatred and violence on college campuses. I think I will use videos
again, but I think there must be an educational point. TODAY in class, we were
talking about stress--a very boisterous group this time--and in our discussion
about combating stress--a student said that coming to University 112 helped
reduce her stress--made me feel warm and fuzzy--even skeptical old me!!!
Norris F. Manning Academic Advisor Southern Illinois University at
Edwardsville NMANNIN@SIUE.EDU Phone 618.692.3701
=========================================================================
Date: Thu, 14 Sep 1995 12:20:42 -0800 From: Don McCormick
don_mccormick@MAIL.ANTIOCHLA.EDU Subject: Re: FYE-LIST Digest - 11 Sep What is
ACADV?
=========================================================================
Date: Thu, 14 Sep 1995 16:50:45 -0500 From: PEGGY PHILPOT pphip@NAV.CC.TX.US
Subject: Re: Videos for COL 101 Tom S.: I teach a required Education and
Career Planning Class and I have faced the same situation this past year. I am
energetic, but the students do not seem to respond. I changed my syllabus this
year to include a large video section. To accomodate this inclusion, I raided
the campus library's educational video collection and found a number of videos
that will help me get the point across and also allow my students to hear
someone else talk for a while. That is a general suggestion for you. A more
specific one is to address topics that are important to this generation or
that will light a fire under them. I would personally shy away from a lot of
popular movies. One exception would be Higher Learning. It's a good film that
speaks to a lot of diverse groups. It would keep their attention during class.
Chances are, however, that they have already seen this movie. I tend to go
more for real-life stories. Frontline put out a video called RACISM 101 about
racial incidents that actually occurred on college campuses across the nation.
It is up to date and very engaging, not to mention that it covers an issue
that seems to be on the hearts of young people these days. A couple of
suggestions to get you started... Don't forget to check out your campus
library. It is a treasure of rent-free videos that can add a lot to your
class. A lot of libraries actually have written reviews of videos in case you
don't have time to screen them yourself. Peggy Philpot Director/Student
Activities Internet: pphip@nav.cc.tx.us Navarro College Phone : 903-874-6501
3200 W. 7th Ave. FAX : 903-874-4636 Corsicana, TX 75110
=========================================================================
Date: Thu, 14 Sep 1995 15:51:28 -0800 From: Carolina Cardenas
carolina_cardenas@CSUSM.EDU Subject: Re: Videos for COL 101 Videos are
definately one way. What we are doing on our campus and is working (at 8 am)
is collaborative learning. They all work in small teams which they have to get
into at the very beginning of each class section. They love it and they feel
that they are meeting new poeple and it has made them feel more comfortable
with the whole transition to university life. Carolina C. C rdenas Director,
Student Affirmative Action California State University, San Marcos
carolina_cardenas@csusm.edu
=========================================================================
Date: Thu, 14 Sep 1995 15:02:00 -1000 From: Felicia Clarke felicia@HAWAII.EDU
Subject: Re: A Quick Organizational Structure Survey At University of Hawaii
at Manoa new student orientation and the freshman year course were conceived
as joint projects of Academic Affairs and Student Affairs. This has worked
with orientation, however even so , most of the direction comes from Student
Academic Services in the Colleges of Arts and Sciences. With the frist year
course, the opposite was true with the coordinator and most of the instructors
coming from student affairs. We are still working on the partnership with
Academic Affairs, for services for first year students, but sometimes the
going is tough.
=========================================================================
Date: Fri, 15 Sep 1995 11:07:34 MDT From: Debbie Hands dhands@ADMIN.NMSU.EDU
Subject: Re: FYE-LIST Digest - 11 Sep Mary, ACADV is a listserv for academic
advisers and an excellent group. I can't say enough good things about it. If
you have anything to do with advising in your job I would recommend joining
it. I know there are several people on the FYE list who are also on ACADV and
I'm sure they will agree. If you need info on how to subscribe, please let me
know privately. Debbie Hands dhands@admin.nmsu.edu Asst. Advising Coordinator
College of Arts and Sciences, New Mexico State Univ. P.O. Box 30001, Dept.
3335 Las Cruces, NM 88003 (505) 646-2941 dhands@admin.nmsu.edu
=========================================================================
Date: Fri, 15 Sep 1995 14:23:19 EST5EDT From: Stuart Hunter
STUARTH@RCCE.SCAROLINA.EDU Organization: Regional Campuses Continuing Ed
Subject: CFP-Forum on Diversity in the Freshman Year C A L L F O R P A P E R S
C A L L F O R P A P E R S Strengthening Our Commitment and Our Competence: A
Special One-day Forum on Diversity in The Freshman Year Experience Feburary
17, 1996 Columbia, South Carolina Who is coming to college? Since the landmark
Civil Rights Legislation of the 1960's, the answer to this question has
changed dramatically. Today's first-year college students mirror the diversity
of the greater society in terms of race, ethnicity, culture, ability, sexual
orientation, and age. But have the traditional structures, policies, and
services of American colleges and universities also changed to serve these
students effectively, or are we actually witnessing a declining campus
commitment to access and support of diverse student groups? A special one-day
forum will convene prior to the 1996 Freshman Year Experience conference and
will bring together outstanding higher education professionals who through
exemplary programs and services have been successful in enhancing the overall
success and retention of under-represented students. We welcome proposals that
describe your work with diverse student groups. Join us as we gather to learn
from each other, thereby strengthening our committment and competence to
better serve diverse populations of first-year students. For more information
or a copy of the call for papers, contact: Mary Stuart Hunter, Co-Director
National Resource Center for The Freshman Year Experience and Students in
Transition 1728 College Street University of South Carolina Columbia, SC 29208
phone (803) 777-4761 fax (803) 777-4699 e-mail STUARTH@rcce.sc.edu
=========================================================================
Date: Fri, 15 Sep 1995 15:16:10 MDT From: DebbieHands dhands@ADMIN.NMSU.EDU
Subject: Re: ACADV I've had several requests for this information, so I'm
posting to the list. Those of you who are involved in academic advising and
are not already subscribers to ACADV are missing out on a real treat. Just be
prepared to receive lots of mail! Just send a message to
LISTSERV@vm1.NoDak.Edu, nothing in the subject line, and the message should
read SUBSCRIBE ACADV [your name]. You should get a reply soon after that with
further instructions. If you have problems, contact the list owner, Hal
Caldwell (a truly delightful person) at 00hlcaldwell@leo.bsuvc.bsu.edu (the
beginning characters are zeroes). Debbie Hands Asst. Advising Coordinator
College of Arts and Sciences, New Mexico State Univ. P.O. Box 30001, Dept.
3335 Las Cruces, NM 88003 (505) 646-2941 dhands@admin.nmsu.edu
======================================================================== Date:
Sat, 16 Sep 1995 15:51:35 EST-10 From: Tammy Muckert T.Muckert@HBS.GU.EDU.AU
Organization: Griffith University- H.B.S. Subject: SACQ Response Thank you to
all of those individuals who were able to help me track down where to get a
copy and/or purchase the Student Adaptation to College Questionnaire. I also
received quite a few queries from people who were also interested in following
up this instrument, so here are the details that I found useful: * The
publisher of the SACQ - for copies of the test and manual: - US$ 31.50/pack of
25 questionnaires Western Psychological Services 12031 Wilshire Boulevard, Los
Angeles, California 90025 USA Ph: 1800 648 8857 Fax: (310) 478 7838
(Attention: Ms Susan Dunn-Weinberg) If you are in Australia - The Australian
Council of Educational Resources (ACER) can get the SACQ kit (which includes
manual, 2 test reports and 25 questionnaires) in for you for approximately
AUS$220.00. Delivery takes approximately 6-8 weeks. Their contact details are:
ACER 19 Prospect Hill Road (Private Bag 55) Camberwell Victoria 3124 AUSTRALIA
PH: (03) 9277 5656 Fax: (03) 9277 5678 (Attention: June Manuel) Unfortunately,
it seems that you can't get an 'anticipated' version of the SACQ (ie. ASACQ).
However, it seems that you can adapt the SACQ by adding the prefix I expect
to.... before each item of the SACQ items. I would be interested in hearing
from individuals who have used or who are intending to use the SACQ and/or
ASACQ in practice and/or research. I would also really like to follow up on
any publications or papers that you have written that detail how, when, why
you used the instrument(s) and what results you have found. Perhaps, if you
respond to me personally rather than to the whole FYE-list at this stage. And
if you are interested in hearing what other people have sent me, just let me
know and I could put something together in response. I think this could be a
very valuable resource for those individuals, like myself, who are interested
in first year student's adjustment to college or university. I look forward to
your responses. Bye for now, Tammy Muckert. Griffith University School of
Applied Psychology AIS -1.13 Nathan Campus Nathan QLD 4111 AUSTRALIA EMAIL:
t.muckert@hbs.gu.edu.au PH: 61 7 3875 7841 FAX: 61 7 3875 5114
=========================================================================
Date: Sat, 16 Sep 1995 11:49:59 -0400 From: Robert Callaway
rcallaw@BGNET.BGSU.EDU Subject: Re: dissertation topic Hello, I am a recently
new member to the listserve and I wanted to introduce myself. I am a second
year doctoral student at Bowling Green State University in the Higher
Education program. Since, my arrival to Ohio I have developed a serious
interest in community college because my advisor previously worked at a two-
year college and I completed a six week internship at Cuyahoga Community
College this summer. As a result, I would like to do my dissertation on some
aspect of community colleges but I need a little advise or suggestions for
some ideas or topics to pursue. Any advise or suggest would be
appreciated....Thanks. Robert Callaway Doctoral Fellow Department of Higher
Education & Student Affairs Bowling Green State University Bowling Green OH
43403-0249 (419)372-6931 fax (419)372-8265 "Great minds have a purpose, others
have wishes." -Washington Irving
=========================================================================
Date: Tue, 19 Sep 1995 06:00:00 -DLST From: Tom Schrautemeier
TSCHRAUTEMEIER@CHUCK.STCHAS.EDU Organization: St. Charles County Community
College Subject: Videos for COL 101: Thanks Thank you to all of the FYE
members who responded to my message regarding videos to spark discussion in my
COL 101 class. I received some excellent suggestions. However, some of the
suggested videos were quite expensive. I was also reminded that the primary
role of any video presentation must be to educate not to entertain. Does
anyone have a strong recollection of the 1973 (I think) movie the "Paper
Chase." I'm not sure that I would want to use it in my COL 101 class, but
didn't it demonstrate the need for student persistance even though you may not
always understand your professor. Any thoughts on this? Have a great day.
TSchrautemeier@Chuck.Stchas.Edu
=========================================================================
Date: Tue, 19 Sep 1995 15:41:35 -0400 From: Louis Schmier
lschmier@GRITS.VALDOSTA.PEACHNET.EDU Subject: Re: Videos for COL 101: Thanks
Tom: As one who has taught a Col 101 type course, I found that DEAD POETS'
SOCIETY was far more effective in generating a discussion than PAPER CHASE
which catered to the image of the informed but uncaring and distant professor.
I also found that first year students had a hard time connecting with Harvard
law students. But, the compassionate, caring, involved humanity of Robins
Williams confronting the system, the "captain my captain" ending, was another
story. You might also consider EDUCATING RITA. There you have a tale of both
dedicated student and caring professor. Have a good one. Louis Schmier
(912-333-5947) lschmier@grits.valdosta.peachnet.edu Department of History
Valdosta State University Valdosta, Georgia 31698
=========================================================================
Date: Tue, 19 Sep 1995 20:49:37 -0700 From: Sue Belatti SCB@A1.UCC.NAU.EDU
Subject: Re: Videos for COL 101: Thanks I remember the movie The Paper Chase
I'm not sure if it would be what you are looking for for your COL 101 class.
This movie was about law students which is more upper-division than your 101
class. And I think a lot of the messages in the movie dealt with the cut-
throat nature of law school, complete with stiff competition and an almost
sabotaging one another in order to survive in the class. (Very much a dog-eat-
dog existence.) These messages may be too strong and misleading for new
students to the system. A great movie, but I'm not sure in this context. Just
my opinion. Sue Belatti sue.belatti@nau.edu
=========================================================================
Date: Wed, 20 Sep 1995 08:06:40 EDT From: Jodi Levine JODIH@VM.TEMPLE.EDU
Organization: TEMPLE UNIVERSITY Subject: Re: Videos for COL 101: Thanks I To
add to the discussion on using the movie The Paper Chase - this summer I read
One-L, a short book by Scott Turrow describing his experiences as a first year
Harvard Law Student. We thought about using it as a summer reading for our
freshman seminar but passed. It is a very well written book that does make one
think about transitions, competition in the classroom, and the drive to
succeed. It would compliment the movie nicely. On a related matter - another
movie you might want to consider is School Ties. Entertaining movie that
tackles the topics of prejudice and social class difference quite nicely. Just
some thoughts... Jodi Levine E-MAIL: | LEARNING COMMUNITIES
JODIH@VM.TEMPLE.EDU TEMPLE UNIVERSITY | CONWELL HALL, 5TH FLOOR PHILADELPHIA,
PA 19122 (215) 204-1937
=========================================================================
Date: Wed, 20 Sep 1995 08:16:27 -0500 From: Julian Parrott jparrott@UIUC.EDU
Subject: Re: Videos for COL 101: Thanks Tom: Have you ever heard of the film
Kes. Social commentary, compassionate teacher, believable characters. Very
moving. Julian Parrott. Academic Advisor (and movie buff) University of
Illinois.
=========================================================================
Date: Wed, 20 Sep 1995 09:23:21 CDT From: patti PSTROUP@UAFSYSA.UARK.EDU
Subject: Re: Videos for COL 101: Thanks The movie higher learning is probably
the BEST i have seen so far dealing with life on a college campus. i did
seminars this summer with incoming FYs--one student stated his biggest fear
was to have his professor call his name the first day of class because his
financial aid had been denied--this happened in the movie and obviously had a
profound impact on him. this movie deals with academic, social, diversity, etc
issues that all of our students are dealing with. we used it for the first day
of resident assistant class here at the university of arkansas. good luck tom!
i don't know if you remember me or not...we were on MCPA together in 1993...
patti stroup coordinator for first year student programs university of
arkansas 900 hotz hall fayetteville, ar 72701 (501) 575-7290
=========================================================================
Date: Wed, 20 Sep 1995 11:07:46 -0500 From: Reid M. Golden
GoldenR@HARTWICK.EDU Subject: Orientation -- I am looking at the possibility
of switching our orientation from several one day sessions plus a 4 day
arrival before classes to a week arrival before classes. I would appreciate
any help, advice or information. Copies of programs for week long sessions
would be wonderful. You can e-mail me direct - Thanks . . . Reid Reid M.
Golden Voice: 607-431-4402 Associate Dean for Academic Services Fax:
607-431-4405 Hartwick College E-mail: GoldenR@hartwick.edu Oneonta, NY 13820
=========================================================================
Date: Wed, 20 Sep 1995 10:28:44 -0500 From: BOBBYE G. FRY, MCMURRY UNIVERSITY
BGFRY@MCM.ACU.EDU Subject: Computers for Freshmen C Greetings Fellow
Academicians, We are studying opportunities for greater involvment in computer
resources by our students and are wondering how many institutions provide
computers for their students' use. Specifically, how many institutions issue
computers to entering freshmen? If issued, do the students get to keep the
computers if they graduate? If students transfer instead of graduate, may they
purchase their computers from the institution? You may respond directly to me
at the address below. Thanks for your information. * Bobbye G. Fry Phone:
915-691-6400 * * Registrar FAX: 915-691-6599 * * McMurry University Internet:
BGFRY@MCM.ACU.EDU * * P. O. Box 338 McMurry Station Toll Free: 1-800-477-0077
* * Abilene, TX 79697-0338 Life is short--eat dessert first!
=========================================================================
Date: Wed, 20 Sep 1995 13:01:05 -0400 R From: Alan Seidman ASEIDMAN@AOL.COM
Subject: Re: Videos for COL 101: Thanks Try Beyond Hatred by Bill Moyers. It
was on Public Television. I showed it to my College Success 101 class, when I
taught, and they would recommend it to all students. Alan Seidman
aseidman@aol.com
=========================================================================
Date: Wed, 20 Sep 1995 13:46:21 -0400 From: Brad E. Burch
MISAAMBEB@IRIS.UNCG.EDU Organization: University of NC at Greensboro Subject:
Re: Videos for COL 101: Thanks Reply to Patti Stroup and others, Just wanted
to add my two cents worth for Higher Learning. My African-American students in
my FYE course suggested I see it and I agree that it realistically portrayed
the campus culture at a majority-white campus (except for maybe the campus
police). A lot of issues were raised which could be natural tie-ins to further
conversation. I've also enjoyed Dead Poet's Society and Hoosiers and Stand &
Deliver but I have yet to see Dangerous Minds. My only concern is that mostof
the movies star a male in the feature/hero role. Dangerous Minds is supposed
to be a moving away from that direction but even Michele Phiefer (sp.) was
chosen for ner figure as much as for her acting abilty. Educating Rita is a
little bit different where both characters seem to evolve, but the ending is
certainly not as jovial as the championship game of Hoosiers. Thanks for your
contributions. I enjoy this discussion because I enjoy movies but also because
these traditional age students grew up with so much more media exposure than I
did. Cable was not a big thing and I never saw an R-rated movie until I was in
college in the late 70's. A different culture but still students grow through
many of the same developmental concerns.... which is why FYE courses do so
well. Brad Burch Academic Advising UNCG misaambeb@iris.uncg.edu
=========================================================================
Date: Wed, 20 Sep 1995 13:59:27 -0400 From: Judy Libman {Academic/Liaison
Officer} judy@UNICAAT.YORKU.CA Subject: Re: Orientation Reid, (and others)
I've just completed a 4-day Academic Orientation week program for incoming
frosh in Science and in Environmental Studies. My program therefore did not
have the traditional liberal-arts focus, but was primarily aimed at Science
types. I sequenced the 4 days so that each day had a theme which drew students
progressively deeper into the university culture. Student reaction was
extremely positive; this was the first time we'd tried a multi-day format and
we were uncertain whether students would come on more than one day. (The week
was mandatory - nudge nudge wink wink - so we didn't have a clue what to
expect.) Turned out that we had large numbers coming for all 4 days. And, at
2:30 on Friday afternoon, at the end of the last program of the week, we had
to vacate the room for an incoming departmental party - but the students
wanted to continue the session with the speakers, so I had to find them
another room so they could keep going! I score that as positive feedback...
Anyway, if this is of use to anyone I can send you a copy of the week's
schedule. (Unfortunately I went a little crazy with complicated WordPerfect
table formatting, so it will have to be sent via snail-mail or fax; I can't
e-mail it.) Judy -- Judy Libman Internet:  216 Norman Bethune College /
Faculty of Pure and Applied Science York University, North York, Ontario M3J
1P3, CANADA Voice: (416) 736-2100 ext. 33940; Fax: (416) 736-5892
=========================================================================
Date: Wed, 20 Sep 1995 15:10:46 GMT-5 From: Phillips, Jan
PHILLIPS@ETSUSERV.EAST-TENN-ST.EDU Organization: East Tennessee State
University Subject: Re: Videos for COL 101: Thanks Also, Klanwatch of the
Southern Poverty Law Center has a program called The Shadow of Hate. The video
is excellent (historical perspectives on all kinds of intolerance) and comes
with 30 free books called Us and Them. I'm using it at the end of my sememster
this year. Good luck, all... Jan Phillips East TN State University Johnson
City, TN
=========================================================================
Date: Wed, 20 Sep 1995 13:59:38 -0700 R From: (Judy Elsley)
JELSLEY@SSNET.WEBER.EDU Subject: Re: Orientation Dear Judy Libman, I would
like to see a copy of the schedule you put together for your orientation. My
e-mail address is JELSLEY@ssnet.weber.edu. Thanks!
=========================================================================
Date: Thu, 21 Sep 1995 07:24:23 +1000 From: Ian Waite Ian.Waite@ANU.EDU.AU
Subject: Re: Orientation Programmes & Handbooks. What is the possibility of
setting up a special e-mail list that would contain resources that members of
the list could access. Obviously, putting everything on this list would
clutter it, while on the other hand just sending it on request makes it
unavailable to new comers and novices to the FYE programme. This ready access
would ceetsainly help us overseas members. Rev. Fr. Ian Waite O.P. JOHN XXIII
COLLEGE Australian National University G.P.O. Box 417 CANBERRA ACT 2601 Tel:
+61-6-279-4904 Fax: +61-6-248-6734
=========================================================================
Date: Wed, 20 Sep 1995 16:52:20 -0500 From: (Pam Wuestenberg) PW22810@SWT.EDU
Organization: Southwest Texas State University Subject: Re: Orientation Please
send me a copy of your 4 day orientation program. Thanks, My fax number is
512-245-8126, Attention: Pam Wuestenberg
=========================================================================
Date: Wed, 20 Sep 1995 17:59:11 CDT From: Jennifer Newhouse
jnewhouse@SCHOLARS.BELLEVUE.EDU Organization: Bellevue University Subject: Re:
Orientation Judy, I'd really like a copy of the orientation program you put
together -sounds great. Could you fax it to me @ 402-293-2020. Thanks in
advance! Jennifer Newhouse Asst. Dir. Student Services Bellevue University
jnewhouse@scholars.bellevue.edu # (402) 293-3773

