  
  

**THE ARTS IN WESTERN CULTURE: Pre-classical to Late Renaissance **

Humanities 201, sections 6-13 (Fall 1999)

  
  

**Instructor:** Jon D. Green

**Class Location:** 2084 JKHB

**Class Time:** MWF 1:00-1:50 p.m.

**Office:** 3010-K JKHB **Extension:** 2346

**Office Hours:** MWF 2-3 p.m.

  
  

**Texts :** Cunningham & Reich, _Culture and Values_ (Harcourt Brace, 4th ed.,
alternate vol.)

_The Norton Anthology of World Masterpieces,_ Vol I (6th ed.).

**Objectives :** <http://humanities.byu.edu>

Humanities courses cross lines which normally separate traditional academic
disciplines in order to reconstruct a fuller sense of the human experience by
engaging the aesthetic sensibility as well as developing intellectual
integrity. Studying the arts in historical perspective opens up an important
gateway to affective kinds of understanding, because it provides access to our
imaginative faculties: "The heart has its reasons which reason knows nothing
of" (Pascal). The Humanities were described by the 1965 act that established
the National Endowment for the Humanities as embracing "the study of
languages, literature, history, and philosophy; the history, criticism, and
theory of art and music; the history of religion, science, and law."

  
  

In this course the arts are viewed as an important creative form of human
communication, and the attempt is made to understand them as a means to an
end, rather than as ends in themselves (as one might do in a fine arts
course). In short, a study of the Humanities embraces two disciplines normally
separated in curriculum planning, the fine and liberal arts: we employ the
critical tools of the liberal arts (logic, writing, thinking, analysis) to the
subject matters of the fine arts (literature, music, drama, painting,
sculpture and architecture). Ideally, a study of the Humanities should examine
the human experience in every time and place. However, due to the time
constraints of a one semester, this course will focus on the creative
achievements of the early history of the Western World (the Occident as
distinguished from the Orient), from pre-classical civilization through the
Italian Renaissance, by viewing artistic expressions and philosophical
perceptions in the context of this historical period. ****

  
  

**Course Requirements :**

1\. Regular attendance, class participation, and advance preparation (complete
the assigned readings on the day they are due as indicated in the syllabus).

  
  

2\. Three **unit exams** (note syllabus for time/place). The Unit III Exam
(Renaissance) will be administered as the final exam (along with one
comprehensive essay).

  
  

3\. One major **term paper** (see attached for details).

  
  

4\. Friday **Breakout** **Section** : As part of the course, you are expected
to attend these weekly **** discussion sessions in which certain texts will be
explored in greater depth. Your TA may involve you in leading discussions and
preparing materials. Be prepared for regular quizzes on the readings or
assigned outlines each Friday. **No make-ups will be given for reading quizzes
or outlines.**

  
  

5\. The **"Apology"** is a 2-page justification of your grade to be handed in
at the final exam. You will learn that a very famous Greek philosopher,
Socrates, made an "Apology" ("defense") of his actions and philosophy in an
Athenian court in 399 B.C. The  first page should include brief responses to
the following:

(1) What you put into the class

(2) What you got out of the class

(3) What you think you deserve as a grade.

The second page should include a brief description of any additional events or
experiences which you sought out to enhance your understanding of the material
covered in the class, such as brief notes on supplemental readings (some are
listed under "Further Reading" at the end of each chapter in
Cunningham/Reich), any of the films you may have viewed which are offered on
BYU cable as listed in the syllabus, or any productions you may have attended
during the semester that treat history from the Renaissance or before, like
the live performance of Aeschylus' _The Libation Bearers_ (Oct. 5 in the de
Jong Concert Hall), or International Cinema's presentation of Sophocles'
_Antigone_ (Nov. 1-6).

  
  

**Grading :**

2 unit exams @ 75 points = 150 pts.

1 term paper = 100 pts.

13 Fri. Reading Quizzes/Outlines (@ 5 points) = 65 pts.

3rd unit exam/final = 100 pts.

Totals = 415 pts.

  
  

You will be graded on the number of points you have earned at the end of the
semester, computed in 10% increments downward from the high score in your
section. If the highest score were 400 points, the A range would be 360-400,
the B range 320-360, etc.

  
  

**General Admonitions :**

Reading assignments vary for each class period. The class schedule below
indicates what selections are to have been read as preparation for lecture or
discussion. During **Breakout** sessions especially, please bring the text(s)
with the assigned readings to class so you can refer to it during discussion.
**Students are forewarned that some days will have heavy reading assignments
while others will be rather light in comparison. A wise policy is to plan
ahead.**

  
  

**Please note:** This syllabus and the requirements are subject to change if
deemed necessary by the instructor.

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

**Term Paper Instructions**

  
  

**Paper length and style:**

**** The paper should be 7-8 pages in length (excluding appendices and
bibliography), typewritten and double-spaced. Choose the style manual (MLA,
Chicago, Turabian, etc.) Used in your academic discipline; if in doubt, use
MLA. The Writing Center (1010 JKHB) has handouts to help you with notational
style. Writing consultants there can also help you with establishing a good
thesis statement and developing arguments.

  
  

**Topic:**

The main objective of the paper is to help you apply knowledge acquired in the
classroom to the analysis of an artistic artifact which has  not been
discussed in the class.

  
  

1) Choose a work representative of one of the time periods we cover in 201
(pre-history to Mannerism).

  
  

2) Restrict your choice to one of the following: a visual work (painting,
sculpture, or piece of architecture); or a performing work (dance, drama, or
music).

  
  

3) Draw on material beyond what the text may offer by consulting the Lee
library holdings and the internet, if applicable.

  
  

4) After discussing the work using all of the categories listed below, devote
a significant portion of your paper connecting the work to the general
concepts you have learned in class about the culture that produced it.

  
  

**Appendices:**

Include a bibliography of the secondary sources you consulted entitled "Works
Consulted." In addition, if you are doing a visual work or a building, include
a photocopy of the work. If you are doing music, include a tape recording of
the work. You may also want to include illustrations, diagrams, score
notations, etc. which would demonstrate important points of your analysis.

  
  

**Evaluation:**

Your paper will be evaluated using the "Essay Rating Scale" found below and
copied from page 17 of the GE "Brief Guide to the Writing of Student Papers."
You may elect to have your TA or the Writing Center evaluate your rough draft
well before the deadline (Monday, November 29 th).

  
  

**Analytical Categories:**

Listed below are the categories of analysis you are to include in your paper:

If you choose to analyze a work of **visual art** , discuss the following
items in detail:

-the subject matter portrayed: myth, history, portrait, etc.

-the materials and means used to create the piece: mosaic, stained glass, fresco, oil, etc.

-the general layout and organization of the piece: line, balance, mathematical,symmetry

  
  

-the effects of color, texture, etc.

-the use of representation, distortion, or refection in favor of abstraction

-the use of symbols or allusions to other works or concepts.

-the major themes of the piece

-the connection between the themes of the piece and its cultural/historical setting

-your own personal informed reaction to the piece

  
  

If you choose to analyze a **building** , discuss the following items in
detail:

-the major mode of construction: post-lintel, arch, combination, etc.

-the construction materials used and the reasons for the choice of these materials

-the overall layout of the floor plan: spatial relationships, use of geometrical forms, etc.

-the exterior decorative plan and its elements and effects

-the interior decorative plan and its elements and effects

-the various functions intended for the building

-the ways the structure relates to its environment

-the general philosophy behind the construction of the building and its connection to the cultural/historical setting.

-your personal informed reaction to the piece

  
  

If you choose to analyze one of the **performing arts** , discuss the
following in detail:

(Note: You should have some musical training to do a music paper)

-the form of the work and the historical background of the form

-the style of the work and its historical roots

-the interrelationships of the elements (musical tonality, dance steps, dramatic plot, etc.)

-the relationship of text to music, text to performance in drama, music to dance.

-the themes of the piece as they relate to the overall effect

-the background of the creator (composer, choreographer, playwright)

-the connection between the themes and the cultural/historical setting of the piece.

-your personal informed reaction to the piece

  
  

**Self-editing Checklist:**

1\. Is there a clear introduction that is interesting and compels the reader
to continue. Does the introduction give you a min-outline of the whole paper?

  
  

2\. Thesis: is there one? Does it clearly present the position argued in the
paper? Is it place at or close to the beginning of the paper?

  
  

3\. Topic sentences: do they support the thesis and provide an outline for the
paper? Can you re-read the thesis after each paragraph and realize you are
still on the same track?

  
  

4\. Is your language clear and appropriate for the topic? Are you clear on
tone, style, and audience? Is it the real you or a clone of your high school
English teacher?

  
  

5\. Conclusion: is it convincing, like a climax to a dramatic work? Did I do
what I said I would do in the beginning? I.e., does it have a sense of closure
and completion?

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

**SCHEDULE**

  
  

**Introduction**

  
  

Mon., Aug. 30 **Session 1**

**** Introduction, Orientation, Pre-test, and Definitions

**Read:** _Culture and Values_ , "The Arts: An Introduction" (xiii-xix)

Wed., Sep. 1 **Session 2**

Pre-classical Foundations of Western Culture

**Read:** CV, chapter 1.

**In-class film:** "Why Man Creates" (excerpt)

  
  

Fri., Sep. 3 **Session 3 [Breakout]**

Biblical Foundations of Western Culture

**Read:** CV 5, 127-131; NA, 1-3; 45-86 (Genesis & Job)

  
  
  
  

[ **LRC Film #1 (HBLL):** "The Way We Are: It Started with the Greeks" (59
min.).  Host James Burke explains how the questioning and rational attitude of
the classical Greeks formed the root of Western thought and led to the
continuing exploration of new ideas, creating a conflict with inherently
conservative institutions. The film is available in the LRC (HBLL) this coming
week Wed-Fri. 8 a.m., 12, and 5 p.m. & Sat. at 10 a.m. Ask the desk attendants
in Library LRC for channel numbers.]

  
  
  
  

******UNIT I. The Classical Age**

  
  

Mon., Sep. 6 **Labor Day Holiday** ****

  
  

Wed., Sep 8 **Session 4**

**** Early Greece

**Read:** CV 2.

  
  

Fri. Sep. 10 **Session 5 [Breakout]**

Homer and the Foundation of Western Literature: the Epic

**Read:** CV 2, 33-37; NA 3-4; 93-208 (Homer's _Iliad_ )

  
  
  
  

[ **LRC Film #2:** Sophocles' _Antigone_ with Juliet Stevenson (120 min.) is
available on cable this coming week Mon.-Fri. 8 a.m., 12 noon, and 5 p.m. and
Sat. at 10 a.m.]

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Mon., Sep.13 **Session 6**

The Rise of Periclean Athens: the Visual Arts

**Read:** CV 3, 59-62; 70-81; NA, 4-8

**In-Film:** "Donald in Mathmagic Land" (excerpt) ****

  
  

Wed., Sep.15 **Session 7**

**** The Hellenic Achievement: Theater

**Read:** CV 3, 62-67; NA, 831-835 (Aristotle's _Poetics_ ).

  
  

Fri., Sep.17 **Session 8 [Breakout]**

Sophocles' _Antigone_

**Read** : NA, 652-657; 701-738 (Sophocles' _Antigone_ ).

  
  

[ **LRC Film #3:** "The Classical Ideal: Greece and Rome" (50 min.).  The
development of Western art reaches back to ancient Greece as traced through
the evolution of the Kouroi and Korai figures and the architecture of the
Parthenon. Michael Wood focuses on the new artistic approach to human form
found in Greece and Rome. Available in the LRC (HBLL) this coming week
Mon.-Fri. 8 a.m., 12 noon, and 5 p.m. and Sat. at 10 a.m.]

  
  

Mon., Sep. 20 **Session 9**

The Hellenic Achievement: Philosophy

**Read:** CV 3, 67-69; NA, 806-830 ( _Apology of Socrates_ , _Phaedo_ )

Wed., Sep. 22 **Session 10**

Hellenistic Greece: The Alexandrine Age

**Read:** CV 3, 67, 81-87.

Fri., Sep. 24 **Session 11 [Breakout]**

The Road to Rome: Mythological Origins

**Read:** CV 4, 91-95; 101-104; NA, 8-10; 841-917 (Virgil's _Aeneid_ )

  
  

[ **LRC Film #4:** "Rise of Rome" (30 min.).  Through its army, Rome built an
empire that shaped the future of Western civilization. The film is available
in LRC (HBLL) this coming week Mon.-Fri. 8 a.m., 12 noon, and 5 p.m. & Sat. at
10 a.m.]

  
  

Mon., Sep 27 **Session 12**

The Rise of Republican Rome: Historical Overview

**Read:** CV 4, 95-101.

**In-class Film:** "Roman Life, Laughter, and Laws" (excerpt)

  
  

Wed., Sep 29 **Session 13**

**** Expansion of Imperial Rome: Sculptural  & Architectural Achievements

**Read:** CV 4, 104-121.

  
  
  
  
  
  

Fri., Oct. 1 **Session 14 [Breakout]**

Augustine and the Rise of Christianity

**Read:** CV 6, 131-135; 145-147; NA, 947-961; 980-1008 (New Testament,
_Confessions_ ).

  
  

[ **Exam on Introduction and Unit I ** will be administered in the Testing
Center (HGB) on the above material anytime Mon. through Wed., Oct. 4-6 (late
day on Thu. w/ $3.50 fee.]

  
  

[ **LRC Film #5:** "City of God" (52 min.).  With the collapse of the Roman
civilian government, the church stepped in to fill the vacuum and became the
dominating influence in medieval society.  The film is available in the LRC
(HBLL) this coming week Mon.-Fri., 8 a.m., 12 noon, and 5 p.m. and Sat. at 10
a.m.]

  
  

******UNIT II. The Middle Ages**

  
  

Mon., Oct.4 **Session 15**

The Medieval Mind

**Read:** NA, 1009-1011.

**Handout:** "Hierarchism"

**In-class Film:** "The Medieval Mind" (26)

  
  

Wed., Oct.6 **Session 16**

Early Christian Art: Byzantium and Ravenna

**Read:** CV 5, 135-141; CV 6, 145-165.

  
  

Fri., Oct. 8 **Session 17 [Breakout]**

The Song of Roland

**Read:** CV, 182-183; **** NA, 1155-1216 **.**

[ **LRC Film #6:** "White Garment of Churches" (60 min.).  The Church of
Paray-le-Monial reveals how monasticism and pilgrimage affected the
architectural development of French Romanesque churches in the llth century
with the triumph of the Gothic style revealed through the studies of Durham,
Canterbury, St. Denis, and Chartres cathedrals.  The film is available this
coming week in the library LRC at same times as above.]

  
  

Mon., Oct. 11 **Session 18**

The Accession of Charlemagne: Institutional hierarchies

**Read:** CV 7, 173-188.

Wed., Oct. 13 **Session 19**

Romanesque Architecture and Sculpture

**Read:** CV 7, 188-193.

  
  

Fri., Oct. 15 **Session 20 [Breakout]**

St. Thomas Aquinas and Scholasticism: The _Summa Theologica_

**Read:** CV 7, 209-217.

**Handouts**

  
  

[ **LRC Film #7:** "Cathedral" (59 min.). A fascinating journey into the
gothic age, depicted partly by an animated story of the human side of
cathedral building. The film is available in library LRC this week, same days,
times as above.]

  
  

Mon., Oct. 18 **Session 21**

The Rise of the Gothic Style: St. Denis.

**Read:** CV 8, 197-204.

  
  

Wed., Oct. 20 **Session 22**

**** The Quintessence of the Gothic Style: Chartres

**Read:** CV 8, 200-208.

**In-class Film:** "Chartres Cathedral" (excerpt)

  
  

Fri., Oct. 22 **Session 23 [Breakout]**

Medieval Secular Music: Minstrelsy and Chivalry

**Read:** CV 7, 178-180.

[ **LRC Film #8:** "Romance and Reality" (52 min.).  During the later Middle
Ages, the reality of Dante, Giotto, and St. Francis replaced the chivalry and
romance of the troubadours and the knights. This film examines chivalry, the
teachings of St. Francis, Dante, Giotto, and the Limbourg Brothers, from
Kenneth Clark's famous _Civilisation_ series (#3).  It is available in the
library LRC this week, same days, times as before.]

  
  

Mon., Oct 25 **Session 24**

Introduction to Dante: Historical Backgrounds

**Read:** NA 1273-74.

  
  

Wed., Oct 27 **Session 25**

Dante's _Divine Comedy_

**Read:** CV 8, 218-223; NA 1274-1317 (Intro and cantos I-VIII).

  
  

Fri., Oct 29 **Session 26 [Breakout]**

_The Inferno_

**Read:** NA, 1318-1423 (cantos IX-XXXIV).

  
  

[ **LRC Film #9:** "Middle Ages: A Wanderer's Guide" (27 min.).  An insider's
view of life in the Middle Ages is presented by a student who illustrates his
engaging "lecture" with dramatic scenes from the literature of the times.
Enactments include Chaucer (Wife of Bath), Villon, and others.  It is
available in library LRC this week, same days, times as before.]

  
  

Mon., Nov.1 **Session 27**

The Fourteenth-Century Transition: Literature (Petrarch, Boccaccio, Chaucer)

**Read:** CV 9, 231-238; NA, 1467-82, 1551-77, 1661-1679.

  
  
  
  
  
  

Wed., Nov.3 **Session 28**

The Fourteenth-Century Transition: Painting (Giotto)

**Read:** CV 9, 238-249.

  
  

Fri., Nov. 5 **Session 29 [Breakout:** Guest Lecture in 2084 JKHB, 1-1:50 p.m.
**]**

The Fourteenth-Century Transition: Early Renaissance Music

**Read:** CV 8, 208-209; CV9, 252-255.

  
  

[ **Unit II Exam** will be administered in the Testing Center anytime Monday
through Wednesday, November 8-10 in the Testing Center (late day, Thursday w/
$3.50 fee).]

  
  

[ **LRC Film #10a:** "The Early Renaissance: Italy and Northern Europe" (60
min.).  The revival of the classical tradition is interpreted from the
contributions of Florentine artists of the early 15th century: Brunelleschi's
soaring Duomo in Florence; Massacio's linear perspective; Donatello and
Ghiberti's pioneering sculpture; OR

**LRC Film #10b:** "Point of View" (50 min.).  A fascinating exploration of
the emergence of visual perspective in Florentine painting and architecture,
narrated by the inimitable James Burke.  They are available in the library LRC
this week, same days, times as before but on different channels.]

  
  
  
  

******UNIT III. The Renaissance**

  
  

Mon., Nov.8 **Session 30**

The Early Florentine Renaissance: Historical Backgrounds

**Read:** CV 10, 279-282.

****

Wed., Nov.10 **Session 31**

Phase I: Masaccio, Ghiberti, and Brunelleschi

**Read:** CV 10, 259-267.

  
  

Fri., Nov. 12 **Session 32 [Breakout]**

_l'uomo universale_

**Read:** CV 10, 283-285  & 309-313; NA 1679-1730.

[ **LRC Film #11:** "Leonardo da Vinci" (52 min.).  The paintings, anatomical
studies, theories of light, engineering projects, and sculpture of Leonardo
illuminate his abiding genius.  It is available Mon-Sat in the library LRC
this week.

  
  

Mon., Nov. 15 **Session 33**

The Medicis: Princely Patronage

**Read:** CV 10, 266-274.

  
  

Wed., Nov. 17 **Session 34**

Leonardo da Vinci

**Read:** CV 10, 274-278.

  
  

Fri., Nov. 19 **Session 35 [Breakout]**

The High Renaissance in Rome: Papal Patronage

**Read:** CV 11, 291-293.

  
  
  
  

Mon., Nov. 22 **Session 36**

Michelangelo: "Scultore"

**Read:** CV 11, 293-295, 299-300.

  
  

Wed., Nov. 24 **Thanksgiving**

  
  

Fri., Nov 26 **Thanksgiving**

  
  

[ **LRC Film #12:** View PBS film, "The High Renaissance: Rome and Venice,"
(60 min.).  With Ldonardo, Michelangelo, and Raphael, the artist as genius
takes center stage. Under Papal patronage, Rome re-emerges as a center of
artistic activity, while Venetian artists excell in capturing nature in light
and brilliant color .  Available in the library LRC for this coming week,
times same as above.]

  
  

Mon., Nov 29 **Session 37**

**** Michelangelo: "Pittore"

**Read:** CV 10, 278-279; CV 11, 295-298.

**Note :** Term Paper due today.

  
  

Wed., Dec 1 **Session 38**

Renaissance Architecture

**Read:** CV 11, 300-301.

  
  

Fri., Dec. 3 **Session 39 [Breakout]**

The Venetian Renaissance ****

**Read:** CV 11, 301-304.

  
  

[ **LRC Film #13:** "Matter of Fact" (59 min.).  The invention of printing
makes learning widely available, transforming the medieval world and later
contributing to the Protestant Reformation and the beginnings of rationalism.
Available in the library LRC same times as above, but only Mon-Thu.]

  
  

Mon., Dec. 6 **Session 40**

Renaissance Music

**Read:** 285-286; 308-309.

  
  

Wed., Dec. 8 **Session 41**

Mannerism

**Read:** CV 11, 304-308.

  
  

[ **Final Examination : **The Final will cover **Unit III** material plus a
comprehensive essay administered in the Testing Center beginning **Tue., Dec.
14** and running through **Fri., Dec 17**. **]**

