****|    | ****  
---|---|---  
  
* * *

**[Presentation Poster](images/BannerPresent645.pdf)**

(This is a large file: 2.35mb.)

* * *

**Web Site Sample Pages:**

[**Welcome**](images/WELCOME2.PDF)

**[Syllabus](images/SYLLABUS.PDF)**

**[Data Links](images/datalinks.pdf)**

* * *

The above files are in .pdf format and require Adobe Acrobat Reader 4 to view
properly. You can get your **FREE** copy or upgrade of Acrobat Reader
[HERE.](http://www.adobe.com/support/downloads/main.html)



A PowerPoint Sample - View as a Slide Show

[Double Diffusion/Numerical Modeling ](ppt%20files/Lecture%2011%20pre.ppt)



Return to  
[SMAST Homepage](../index.html)

|   |  **********![](images/UMDsm.gif)**

* * *

********************

  

**Distance Learning Project Report**

  
****May 31, 2000  
Dr. Avijit Gangopadhyay  
Course: Physics 645: Ocean Circulation and Modeling  
Offered Spring 2000  
Location: Distance learning Conference Room (#204), Center for Marine Science
and Technology, University of Masschusetts Dartmouth, 706 Rodney French Blvd.
New Bedford, MA 02744.

Phone: (508) 910-6330  
Fax : (508) 910-6371  
e-mail: avijit@umassd.edu

Project Web site: www.cmast.umassd.edu/dlcourse

******![](images/smlogo.gif)**

* * *

  

**ABSTRACT**  
This report describes the approach and implementation adopted to design a
course web site from standard traditional lecture materials. It also describes
the integration for e-learning of real-time data from scientific web sites
into the curriculum. Examples of the web site, some of the lecture material
and a poster presentation are included in this report. The full report is also
available on the web through a hyperlink at www.cmast.umassd.edu/dlcourse.

  
**1\. Summary of Project Results**

Our goal was to relate our experiences while investigating the capabilities of
live, teleconferencing technology and a web site in replacing the functions of
a traditional classroom and expanding on those functions to fit the special
needs of this course.  
There are a number of special challenges in offering a graduate course of this
type in a distance learning format. First, the real-time monitoring of ocean
phenomena on the Internet and student reports on the phenomena must be
integrated in the distance learning format. In addition, the subject material
is highly technical and fashioned in a wide variety of modes, including
mathematical equations, technical illustrations, and color transparencies, as
well as the usual "hard copy" class notes and supplemental texts. This
complicated their presentation.  
Lecture materials were prepared using Microsoft Word(C), PowerPoint(C), and a
stand-alone version of Equation Editor(C). A web site was constructed to
augment the lecture presentations with notes, supplemental readings, the class
syllabus and other relevant materials. Students can read these materials
online or download and print the material, which is presented in various
formats including HTML and Adobe PDF files. The Course Builder program,
available through the Computing and Informational Technology Service at UMASS
Dartmouth, added several other options to the web site including an
interactive discussion forum. The combination of automatic functions and the
ability to bypass those functions using HTML and File Transfer Protocol (ftp),
meant we had a great deal of flexibility in designing the web site for our own
purposes.  
Our intent was to test two particularly unique aspects of this course via
distance learning media. The first was the real-time monitoring of the El Nino
- La Nina phenomenon over the Internet and students' reports on the phenomenon
to the class. The other unique aspect was that of conducting a numerical
experiment over the Internet and presenting it in the distance learning
setting via teleconferencing technology. Unfortunately, using the
teleconferencing technology was not successful.(See 5 Problem Areas).  
In the following, we describe the approach and implementation of the Class Web
site, integration of real-time monitoring sites with the Lectures, our
assessment and certain issues and expenses incurred. We acknowledge the
additional support provided by SMAST during an additional semester for the
student support that was needed during Spring, 2000, when the course was being
delivered.  
  

**2\. Approach and Implementation Plan**

A web site was successfully established for the class. It included the class
syllabus, Adobe Acrobat files of class handouts and notes for printing; links
to web sites used for the El Nino/La Nina; a list of class members and their
email addresses; and an interactive forum in which students submitted
questions for Dr. Gangopadhyay or shared information of interest to the class.
Although there was some difficulty in finding the best format for the various
kinds of materials used in the class, the web site proved useful for
distributing materials. Microsoft Word and Equation Editor can produce files
which can be converted to printer description files (.pdf) using Adobe
Acrobat. Acrobat Reader is a free utility, so students can use the utility to
download and print the converted files. Some class notes were successfully
distributed this way as well as scanned documents \- class readings - which
were also saved as .pdf files and read or printed with Adobe Acrobat.

Although we were unable to test the video equipment for this class, due to
failure of the microwave transmission equipment (See 5 Problem Areas), several
of the goals of the project were accomplished. These included the use of
online, real-time data for class projects, as well as the design of the web
site.



**3\. The Web Site**

The course web site was created by using the UMass Dartmouth Course-Builder
program and modifying it to suit the needs of the course. The components of
the web site included: the welcome page; a class syllabus; a list of class
members ( "Who's Who"); class lecture notes; resources \- a page for web links
and another for papers; and an interactive Forum.

The Welcome page contained announcements and links to the other elements of
the web site. The Syllabus contained the course schedule, topics to be
covered, grading, and textbooks used. "Who's Who" listed class members and
their email addresses.

A Data Links web page was designed for the real-time data links which students
were monitoring for the class. A variety of links - to the National
Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration (NASA) and other scientific sites - was used, some
links supplied by the instructor, some by the students. The students used the
information from these sites to compile notebooks and prepare written reports.

The Resources page contained a reading list for papers for the class. Some of
the readings were provided online as Adobe Acrobat files, which could be
downloaded and printed by class members.

The lecture notes were posted on a Lecture Notes page, as they were available.
The notes were compiled first in Microsoft Word. A program called Equation
Editor, which interfaces with Word, was used to construct the equations.
Illustrations were drawn with the Draw tools in Word or, when the drawing was
too complex for Word, in Adobe Illustrator and then imported into Word. The
Word files were then converted to Adobe Acrobat printer description files
(.pdf). The .pdf files could then be linked from a HTML page for students to
access.

The Course-Builder software provided the interactive Forum. In the Forum
students could post questions for the instructor or post information to share
with the class. This was particularly useful toward the end of the course as
all students could view questions and answers as they prepared for the final
exam. Some students also shared information about problems they had
implementing ocean modeling programs.



**4\. Integration of Real-time Monitoring Web Sites for E-learning**

The project successfully used online, real-time data for SST (Sea Surface
Temperature) and SSH (Sea Surface Height) from various web sites including:  
(i) National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) TOPEX/POSEIDON web
site (http://topex-www.jpl.nasa.gov/);  
(ii) National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) site
(http://www.pmel.noaa.gov/toga-tao/el-nino/nino-home.html); and  
(iii) Naval Research Laboratory site
(http://www7300.nrlssc.navy.mil/altimitry).

Students downloaded data from the web sites and prepared a notebook which
illustrated changes over time in SST and SSH in the Pacific equatorial region.
They also submitted a written analysis of the El Nino/La Nina phenomenon they
were observing.

Using the online, real-time data was very useful to students. Working with
something real, rather than with hypothetical situations from a textbook,
enhanced their learning experience by making it easier for them to relate
theory to reality. The plots and animations provided online in real-time,
translated the abstract mathematics to the real world in a way that no other
media could.



**5\. Problem Areas (Issues of Concern)**

Technology is fragile at this time! Be prepared with back-up materials.  
Warning: Anyone attempting to use a microwave link to do distance learning
course needs to be aware of the unreliability of this technology. It is highly
recommended that alternatives are planned and attention paid to maintaining a
good web site in anticipation of frequent technology failure!

One of the issues encountered with the web site was the posting of class
lessons. The nature of the subject matter of this class - including working
with real-time data - and the fact that discussion topics sometimes had to be
modified to accommodate the needs of the graduate students in the class, meant
the notes that had been prepared in advance did not correspond to the class
discussions. A better way of organizing the lessons would have been to design
each one around a topic (Salt fingering, Kelvin waves, the primitive
equations, etc.) rather than sequentially arranging the information, using a
previous, conventional class schedule as the model. It should also be noted
that instructors using a web site should consider posting a lesson outline
which emphasizes important points rather than detailed notes. This would help
avoid the need for time-consuming revisions and also allow the instructor more
flexibility in how he or she teaches a topic. Students, however, would still
get the information they need concerning the material covered in a particular
lesson.



**5\. Assessments**

In this section, we offer some suggestions, wisdom, warnings, and future
plans. The lecture notes, a combination of words, equations and illustrations,
presented a problem because they were time consuming to produce and difficult
to revise. Because there is no way to revise them once they are converted to
.pdf files and posted on the web, every change required making changes to the
Word document, re-converting the file, and re-posting the file on the web.
Compounding this problem was the fact that originally the notes were organized
sequentially, as they had been used previously. As changes were made in the
course to suit the new format of using real-time, online data, and to
accommodate the needs of these particular students, that organization was a
problem. The notes are currently being re-organized and revised around lesson
topics;  "The Primitive Equations," "Salt Diffusion," "Kelvin Waves," for
example. This arrangement will make it easier to adapt assignments to a new
schedule and for students to find what they need.

It would also be useful in the future to keep in mind that in a distance
learning setting, particularly one which will utilize more than one technology
(the web and video, for example), notes should be organized in a way which can
easily fit the requirements of each. For example: when a lecture topic was
prepared for a PowerPoint presentation on video, it was necessary to re-do the
notes to suit the new format. Composing notes in a way that converts easily
from one format to another could save much time.

It was also noted that students needed active encouragement to use the web
site resources. The forum provides a very efficient way for an instructor to
share information with all class members. If one student asks a question, all
students can benefit from seeing the answer. The forum also provides a way for
students for work cooperatively by sharing information with each other.
However, students need to be motivated to become involved in Forum discussions
and in the future I would incorporate more ideas for providing that
motivation.



**6\. Project Demonstrations**

A poster and demonstration on distance learning aspect of the class was
prepared by Dr. Gangopadhyay and graduate assistant Dianne Rittmuller. This
poster demonstration was exhibited at NERCOMP/University of Massachusetts
Instructional Technology Conference 2000 in Sturbridge in March, as well as at
the Sigma Xi exhibition. A pdf file can be found in the web site
www.cmast.umassd.edu/dlcourse.

  
**7\. Budget Expenditure Documentation**  
Salary  
$2500 - Graduate Student (Dianne Rittmuller) support for project. (250 hours
at $10/hour)

Return to Top of Page

Return to  
[SMAST Homepage](../index.html)  

