HISTORY 11 - SECTION 5

**A HISTORY OF WESTERN CIVILIZATION**

**FALL 2000**

*** * ***

Instructor Katherine Tucker McGinnis

Class Time TTh 11:00 - 12:15

Location Saunders 112

Office Hours Tues, 12:20 - 1:30; Wed, 3-4; and by appointment

Office Hamilton Hall 419

Phone 843-6300

Email ktmcginn@email.unc.edu

Website  <http://www.unc.edu/courses/westciv>****

The website will be used primarily for information concerning organization and
scheduling.

Check the
**[BlackBoard](http://teach.oit.unc.edu:8090/courses/hist011005f00/)** site
for announcements and discussion groups.

**______________________________________________________________**

** **

**This syllabus is the contract under which this course if taught. By
enrolling in this course, and remaining enrolled, you accept its conditions.**

**_____________________________________________________________**

**Course Intent** This is a survey of western civilization from the
perspectives of social history. It looks at the period from the earliest
civilizations, c.3000B.C.E., until about 1700C.E. Note that the terms "Before
Common Era" (B.C.E.) and "Common Era" (C.E.) are now usually found rather than
"Before Christ" (B.C.) and "Anno Domini" (A.D.).

The scope of the possible information, stories, events, people that this
course could include is beyond any possibility of "coverage". We will try to
touch on those high points that seem to have broad or long-ranging impact and
to contextualize them in order to demonstrate historical complexity and
interdependence

A social history does not ignore wars, diplomacy, events, or famous people,
but it does examine a broad array of perspectives that include, among many
possibilities, economic, religious, gender, sexual, scientific. There is also
a tendency to include the "common man" as well as the "great man" and women,
to the extent that historical sources permit.

The historiographic process is based on both facts and interpretation. The
facts come from sources which the historian must interrogate in order to
understand and evaluate them. The interpretation depends on the capacity of
the historian to integrate those facts in a larger context and to make an
argument based on a responsible selection of the facts, as well as on the
point of view of the historian. History, perhaps particularly "popular
history," can be driven by extra-academic intentions that the audience must
learn to recognize and to be aware of their influence on the interpretation.

Sources can be written records -- chronicles and parish records are two
examples -- and material artifacts, which can include tools, buildings, coins,
artwork, pottery, furniture, fabric and clothing. A book can be treated as
both a written record and as a material object, studied for its physical
properties.

**Honor Code ** The UNC Honor Code prevails. You are expected to abide by the
Honor Code for all work in this class. All alleged violations will be handed
over to the academic court for adjudication. No violations or alleged
violations will be handled independently.

**General Ground Rules ** Nothing will be accepted late, without documentation
of illness or emergency. On time means at the beginning of class, not at the
end or after.

I assume you would not bring a phone or other noise-producing equipment to
class, but if you do have anything of that type with you, please de-activate
it.

Our class meets at a time when some people are having lunch. If you think you
might be hungry or thirsty during class, be prepared by having a snack before
class If you have special needs for food or drink during class time, please
see me privately.

Bring loose leaf paper, not sheets torn from a notebook to each class for
quizzes, etc.

Come prepared to each class. I have constructed this course with entering
students in mind, trying to make it easy for you to keep up in your work.
Prepared means more than reading the assignment; it also means thinking about
it in order that you can participate intellectually in the class. Bring your
text (or the book being discussed) to class.

I recommend that you take advantage of my office hours. I hope to get to know
you better than class time and your written work will permit. If you take the
time to meet with me, I think I can make the course more in accord with your
individual areas of interest.

Papers/Writing \- I expect your writing, whether in assigned papers or tests,
to meet conventional standards for written, not spoken, English. This includes
grammar, syntax, and word choice. For example, I can imagine no good reason to
find the word "hopefully" in your paper. Please, if you are unsure about your
writing for an assignment, see me and/or get help from the Writing Center
(962-7710). **** Be forewarned: one-on-one appointments at the Writing Center
fill up fast. The Writing Center offers a new handout, "Writing in History."
Their webpage, where this and many other topics can be found:
www.unc.edu/depts/wcweb

There will be no rewrites accepted, although I will be happy to discuss your
papers or to look at them in advance of the due date.

**Required Textbooks** _The Athenian Citizen._ Princeton, New Jersey: The
American School at Athens, 1987.

Chambers, Mortimer, et al. _The Western Experience._ vol. I, _To the
Eighteenth Century,_ 7th ed. Boston et al **:** McGraw-Hill, 1999.

Chaucer, Geoffrey. _Selected Canterbury Tales._ Dover Thrift Editions. New
York: Dover, 1994.

Davis, Natalie Zemon. _ The Return of Martin Guerre. _ Cambridge and London:
Harvard University Press, 1983.

Golden, Richard M. _The Social Dimension of Western Civilization._ vol. 1:
Readings to the Seventeenth Century, 4th ed. New York: St. Martin's Press,
1999.

Machiavelli, Niccol¨°. _The Prince,_ ed. and trans. David Wooten. Indianapolis
and Cambridge: Hackett, 1995.

**Course Requirements** **Diagnostic Quizzes** Be prepared for a brief quiz,
based on Chambers (or other materials that I will provide in advance, such as
maps), on any Tuesday. It could include map identification, short answer
questions, identification, or sequencing. The diagnostics are designed to help
you keep up with the reading and to determine where any weak areas might lie.
I will count the best 5 grades. There are no make-ups for the weekly quizzes.

**Hour Exams** \- There will be three hour exams, on Sept 14, Oct 19, and Nov
21. The format will include short answer and essay questions. There will be no
make-ups without documentation of illness or emergency.

**Final Exam** \- There will be a cumulative final exam on Dec 16, at noon. It
cannot be scheduled at any other time without permission of the dean. Students
who have three exams scheduled within a twenty-four hour period may request a
change of schedule. See "Fall 2000 Directory of Classes," p. 4.

**Discussion** \- In groups of 10-12, you will spend part of most class
periods (about 15-20 minutes) discussing the material in Chambers assigned for
that class period. I will assign you to groups. Working in pairs, e.g., two
leaders per discussion, you will be responsible for leading three sessions.
Each discussion leader will prepare an outline he or she will use for the
discussion. The leaders will turn in these outlines, a list of those present,
and a _brief_ summary of the session, successes and weaknesses, hot topics,
points people found confusing, etc. You will **_not_** be graded on the
"success" of the discussion. You are responsible for a reasonable preparation
(some questions that show you read and thought about the material) and a
conscientious, if succinct reflection on the session. Your outline should be
**** double-spaced, in 12 point type, preferably "Times" or "Times New Roman"
font. It must be turned in by the beginning of the next class. I will assign
the days for each student to lead discussion at the time the group are
organized, but you may exchange within your group, as long as each member
leads three discussions.

**Paper** \- There will be a paper based on Davis' _The Return of Martin
Guerre_ and the viewing of the film by that name, and relevant materials in
Chambers. The paper should be 3-5 pages in length, double-spaced, in 12 point
type, preferably "Times" or "Times New Roman" font.

It _should_ address one of the following topics, as these sources -- film,
books -- present them in early modern France:

lives of women and domestic relationships

economic and/or religious influences on social relations

legal process and the relation of social and political units

It _must_ address the question of how history can be examined and interpreted
in text and in film and the problems and propensities of each medium. It is
not, however, a film review. Acting is not under discussion, although you may
consider the seeming historical "rightness" of costumes, set, and physical
behavior, including gesture.

**Project** \- The three class meetings after Thanksgiving will be devoted to
group projects that will attempt to bridge the chronological march of the
previous part of the course, which follows Chambers, with a diachronic
examination of topics in social history, using Golden. The latter is a
collection of recent articles by prominent historians and, through this
project, I hope that you will not only gain an understanding of how an issue
is dealt with differently in different times and places and how change in
attitudes, values, etc., can take place, but you will also see how historians
practice their craft.

In 6 **** groups of 10, you will prepare a class presentation based on one
topic (see below) from the readings in Golden. I will assign you to a group,
based on the preferences that you state on your identification cards. I will
do my best to place you in your first or second choice. If you know of any
excusable reason that you cannot be present for any of the three class
meetings immediately after Thanksgiving, let me know. These projects must be
presented during those classes. There will be very limited class time to
organize your group and plan for meetings outside of class. You will have 30
minutes to present. The format -- dramatization, quiz show, debate, musical,
something your group invents -- is up to each group. You can depend on the
audience being familiar with the basic historical material on which your
presentation is based because all the chapters of Chambers, and all the
supplementary readings ( _The Athenian Citizen,_ Chaucer, Davis, and
Machiavelli) will have been read before Thanksgiving break. By the last class
period (and not a half an hour later) you must turn in _individual_ __ reports
of your project to cover preparation process, group dynamics and contributions
of your peers, your "take" on audience response, and "what you learned" about
the topic itself. The paper should be 3-5 pages, again double-spaced, 12
point, preferably "Times" or "Times New Roman" font.

The topics, with their readings, are:

_Disease_ (Scobie; Herlihy,  "Family," Keegan; McNeill)

_Family_ (Bullough et al; Dixon; Herlihy,  "Children"; Cressy)

_Religion_ (Soler; Pagels; Hsia; Davis)

_Sexuality and the Body_ (Dover; Elias; Greico; Briggs )

_Sports and Entertainment_ (Baker; Veyne; Rossiand; Muir)

_Work_ (Mendelsohn; Kitchen; Duby; Weisner)

**Attendance and Participation** This is built in via the discussion and
project groups, but I encourage you, as well, to raise questions during
lectures. (For the benefit of less vociferous classmates, the usual hand-
raising system will prevail).

**Evaluation** Discussion  15%

Quizzes  10%

Hour Exams 10% each 30%

Final Exam 20%

Martin Guerre Paper 10%

Project 15%

I do not grade on a curve. I also do not wish to contribute to grade
inflation. However, if you do everything on the syllabus conscientiously, I'll
be hard pressed not to give a lot of very good grades.



**_Course Schedule and Assigned Readings_** __

_Date Topic Readings/Assignments_

Tues, Aug 22 Intro, Contract, Hist. Method, Vietnam Chambers \- Preface &
Intro



Thurs, Aug 24 The First Civilizations Chambers \- Ch 1



Tues, Aug 29 The Forming of Greek Civilization Chambers \- Ch 2

Discussion

Thurs, Aug 31 Athens \- History from Objects _The Athenian Citizen_

Discussion



Mon, , Sept 4 LABOR DAY



Tues, Sept 5 Classical and Hellenistic Greece Chambers \- Ch 3

Discussion



Thurs, Sept 7 The Roman Republic Chambers \- Ch 4

Discussion



Tues, Sept 12 The Empire and Christianity Chambers \- Ch 5

Discussion



Thurs, Sept 14 _First Quiz_ \---



Tues, Sept 19 The Making of Western Europe Chambers \- Ch 6

(Discussion) __



Thurs, Sept 21 The Empires of the Early Middle Ages Chambers \- Ch 7

(800-1000): Creation and Erosion (Discussion)



Tues, Sept 26 Restoration of an Ordered Society Chambers \- Ch 8

Discussion



Thurs, Sept 28 The Flowering of Medieval Civilization Chambers \- Ch 9

Discussion



Mon, Oct 2 LAST DAY TO DROP CLASSES



Tues, Oct 3 Medieval England - History from Literature Chaucer

Discussion



Thurs, Oct 5 FALL BREAK - NO CLASS



Tues, Oct 10 The Urban Economy and the Consolidation Chambers \- Ch 10

of States Discussion

Thurs, Oct 12 UNIVERSITY DAY - NO CLASS



Tues, Oct 17 Breakdown and Renewal in an Age of Plague Chambers \- Ch 11

Discussion



Thurs, Oct 19 _Second Quiz_



Tues, Oct 24 Tradition and Change in European Culture, Chambers \- Ch 12

1300-1500 Discussion



Thurs, Oct 26 Reformations in Religion Chambers \- Ch 13

Discussion



Tues, Oct 31 Early Modern Europe - Film as Davis

Interpretation: "The Return of Martin Guerre"



Thurs, Nov 2 Economic Expansion and New Politics Chambers \- Ch 14

**All requests for AV support for.** Discussion

** projects due today**



Tues, Nov 7 A New Kind of Rule for a Self-Conscious  Machiavelli

World - "Negative Space" and the Discussion

Didactic Text



Thurs, Nov 9 War and Crisis Chambers \- Ch 15

Discussion

**Martin Guerre paper due today at the beginning of class.**



Tues, Nov 14 Culture and Society in the Age of the  Chambers \- Ch 16

Scientific Revolution Discussion





Thurs, Nov 16 The Emergence of the European State System Chambers \- Ch 17

Discussion



Tues, Nov 21 _Third Quiz_ \---



Thurs, Nov 23 THANKSGIVING BREAK - NO CLASS



Tues, Nov 28 Projects \- "Work and Play"

Work

Sports and Entertainment



Thurs, Nov 30 Projects \- "Heart and Soul"

Disease

Religion



Tues, Dec 5 Projects \- "His and Hers"

Family

Sexuality



Thurs, Dec 7 LAST CLASS - Course Review - This is not an examination
preparation or review, although it may help you in your own preparation. I
hope on this day that we will "pull the course together" by looking at various
topics, both from the projects and elsewhere, and searching for threads or
patterns in what we have studied throughout the semester.

**All project papers due today at the beginning of class.**



