**

SYLLABUS







HISTORY 104-85



HISTORY OF EUROPE THROUGH THE MID-17TH CENTURY



MADISONVILLE COMMUNITY COLLEGE



MADISONVILLE, KY 42431



WEDNESDAYS 6:00 - 8:45 P.M.



INSTRUCTOR: ROBERT T. ADKINS

1237 GRAPEVINE ROAD

MADISONVILLE, KY 42431

(502) 821-0218 - HOME

(502) 821-2250, EXT. 2152 - COLLEGE



Room 137

(1st. floor--John H. Gray Building)

OFFICE HOURS POSTED OR BY APPOINTMENT



MUHLENBERG SOUTH MIDDLE SCHOOL



FALL 1998



  1. History 104:** This course is a survey of the development of European politics, society, and culture through the age of religious conflict.
**



  2. Course Title: **A History of Europe Through The Mid-17th Century



**

  3. Credit Hours:** 3 hours



**

Text and Supplementary Readings:

**



Perry, Chase, Jacob, Jacob, Von Laue. ** _Western Civilization.**_ 5W edition,

Volume I.



Perry, Peden, Von Laue. ** _Sources of The Western Tradition.**_ 3rd edition,

Volume 1.



**

  4. Course Objectives:
**



The student will be able to:



**

    1. Identify** examples of his/her cultural, social, political, religious, and economic heritage.



**

    2. Analyze** both foreign and domestic issues in the history of the major civilizations studied.



**

    3. Compare** the various European civilizations in selected areas.



**

    4. Evaluate** sources other than textbook and class notes.



**

    5. Communicate** ideas effectively through writing.



**

  5. General Requirements for The Course:
**



    1. Students are required to purchase the textbook ** _Western Civilization,**_ and keep up with the assigned textbook readings. 



Students are required to purchase ** _Sources of The Western Tradition**_ and
keep up with assignments.



_

    2. Tests_. There will be three unit tests plus the Final Examination. At the end of the semester, the grades will be calculated as follows:



Attendance................................ 25

3 unit test grades ..... .....225

Final Examination ... .....125

Readings Journal. .... _25

_

Total .....400



A = 360 1 ABS = -5

B = 320 2 ABS = -10

C = 280 3 ABS = -15

D = 240 4 ABS = -20

E = below 240 5 ABS = -25



_

Example_ : Attendance.................... 25 (NO ABS)

Test 1 ................ 60

Test 2 ................ 70

Test 3 ................ 70

Final ....109

Readings Journal .... _20

_

Total ... 354 = B+



Unit Tests will contain both objective and essay sections. The final
Examination will be comprehensive and objective in nature. More instruction on
the Unit Tests and the Final Examination will be given as the semester
progresses.

Each student will be required to keep an up-to-date Readings Journal.



Primary source readings are contained in the ** _Sources of The Western
Tradition**_ by Perry, Peden, and Von Laue. Readings Journal entries will
include a one-half to one page personal observation of each assigned reading.
The entry should include a brief summary of the reading as well as a personal
observation of what that particular source reveals about the individual,
people, events, or period.



The Readings Journal should be kept up-to-date because the readings could be
covered on the examinations.



**

  6. Discussion:
**



Questions and discussion will be encouraged during each class session.
Significant contributions to class discussions will influence borderline
grading decisions.



**

  7. Class Notes:**



Students should take good class notes because many of the test questions will
deal with material covered in the class. However, some questions will be asked
from the textbook and Study Guide Readings to be sure that students are
reading the textbook and readings.



**

  8. Class Attendance is Expected:
**



Each student should make a supreme effort to attend class each time it meets
because you are responsible for the material covered at each meeting. **Roll
will be taken.** Class attendance will have an influence on borderline grading
decisions. Chronic absenteeism will have a definite influence on course
grades. If county schools are closed due to weather, _no_ class.



**

  9. Drop Policy:
**



Students may drop the class up until and including the last day of class with
a grade of "W".



**

  10. Incomplete Grade Policy:
**



Incompletes ("I's") will be granted only in the case of emergencies or extreme
illness.



**

  11. Ethics/Values:
**



Plagiarism and cheating are serious academic offenses. Please refer to the
community college code for definitions and sanctions for these offenses.



**

  12. General Education Competencies:**



The student will demonstrate competency in:

**

    1. Writing** by using standard written English in the composition of identification paragraphs on significant persons, places, and events.
**

    2. Reading** by compiling a satisfactory Readings Journal from selected primary and secondary sources.
**

    3. Integrated Learning** by stating the importance of signficant persons, places, and events from other disciplines.
**

    4. Creative and Critical Thinking** by interpreting selected primary and secondary sources.
**

    5. Ethics and Values** by properly crediting sources used in their Readings Journal.



  13. "Any student requiring individualized classroom accommodations due to a disability should schedule a conference with the Disability Resource Coordinator (Valerie Wolfe, Room 345) at your earliest convenience."



**

  14. General Education Course Specific Competency:
**



The student will be able to recognize the impact of decisive ideas and events
in human nature.



**

  15. Course Outline and Chapters:

**



**

History 104-02 - History of Europe Through The Mid-17th Century

_Class Date_ _Topic_ _Chapter

**_



W 08-26-98 The Ancient Near East Chap. 1



W 09-02-98 The Hebrews Chap. 2



W 09-09-98 The Greek City-State & Greek  Chap. 3

Thought (Review List & Test format)



W 09-16-98 ** FIRST EXAM**

The Hellenistic Age Chap. 5

W 09-23-98 The Roman Republic Chap. 6



W 09-30-98 The Roman Empire Chap. 7



W 10-07-98 Early Christianity & Review List Chap. 8



W 10-14-98 ** SECOND EXAM**

The Heirs of Rome Chap. 9



W 10-21-98 The Flowering of Medieval Chap. 11

Culture



W 10-28-98 The Later Middle Ages Chap. 12



W 11-04-98 The Renaissance  Chap. 13

Review List



W 11-11-98 **THIRD EXAM**

The Reformation Chap. 14



W 11-18-98 European Expansion Chap. 15



W 11-25-98 The Rise of Sovereignty Chap. 16



W 12-02-98 **LAST CALL - READINGS JOURNAL

**



W 12-09-98 The Age of Enlightenment  Chap. 18

Review List



W 12-16-98 ** FINAL EXAM

**







HIS10402.SYL

