  
  
![Adult and Continuing Education](images/ae.jpg) 306 Stone Bldg.,Tallahassee,
FL 32306-4451 - (850) 644 8165 - Fax (850) 644 6401 - E-mail [adult-
ed@garnet.acns.fsu.edu](MAILTO:adult-ed@garnet.acns.fsu.edu)  
![](images/line1.jpg)  
---  
  
|  |  [FSU](http://www.fsu.edu/) ![Double Arrow](images/arrows.gif)
[COE](http://www.fsu.edu/~coe) ![Double Arrow](images/arrows.gif)
[EFPS](http://www.fsu.edu/~efpsweb) ![Double Arrow](images/arrows.gif) [Adult
& Continuing Education](index.html) ![Double Arrow](images/arrows.gif) [Course
offerings](courses/) ![Double Arrow](images/arrows.gif) Processes ...  
---  
  
|  
  
** PROCESSES OF ADULT AND CONTINUING EDUCATION (3 Credits)  
ADE 5380 **  
  
Facilitator: [Peter Easton](faculty/easton.html)  
  
|  "Please note that syllabi of current courses offered by the Adult Education
Graduate Program are presented here strictly for informational purposes and as
a way of familiarizing interested people with some of the content of our
classes. The actual syllabus of a course in any given semester may differ from
the one presented here, and a few entries on the archive copies available may
be out of date."  
---  
  
"Process" has traditionally been one of the key notions in adult and
continuing education and -- as we shall see -- is becoming a central theme in
a number of other fields as well, from business management to curriculum
design and even philosophy. Focusing on _process_ means paying close attention
to the _how_ of social activity, group governance and interpersonal relations
that so often determines _what_ we manage to produce, create or learn -- and
_how much_ we get out of it. All of us have experienced situations where the
initial concept seemed great, but things broke down "in process" -- whether
from inattention to feedback, inability of people to work together, inadequate
communication or one of a litany of other problems.

Adult educators (of whatever stripe: trainers, extension agents, social
marketers, organizational or community developers, continuing education
administrators, distance learning specialists...) have been particularly
attuned to this dimension of their role. There are at least three important
reasons for the fact:

  1. Most forms of adult education are not compulsory, at least not in the same sense as K-12 schooling. With a few exceptions, there are no _legal_ consequences for abstaining or dropping out, and adults typically "vote with their feet" when it comes to assessing the worth of adult education opportunities. They must be "volunteers for learning," to cite the title of a classic in the field. This is why "participation" (i.e., factors determining enrollment in such programs or opportunities) is such an important topic in our literature, as is the notion of "self-directed learning." How people are motivated and maintain interest for renewed learning is thus a major concern for the adult education professional, who must be at least as concerned with facilitating the process of learning among participants themselves as with teaching or inculcating any particular content.  
  

  2. At the same time, it is one of the principles of adult education that students learn from each others experience as well as -- and sometimes as much as (!) -- they do from instructors or teachers. We also hold that adults have a store of previous experience which must be taken into account in the instructional process, a body of personal knowledge that can constitute an important learning resource for their peers. An essential method of the profession therefore involves helping people   
  

    1. to identify their common learning interests or needs and their existing knowledge resources; and  
  

    2. to work together on developing -- from these materials and those an adroit facilitator can make available -- the particular policies, programs and activities that will facilitate further learning on their part and create true learning environments or knowledge-building communities in their midst.  
  

  3. Finally, it is our experience that much of the learning potential in a group of adults -- an organization, business, public institution, voluntary association or community -- lies embedded and sometimes entrapped in it own process. People have not been brought together in a way that elicits their own best knowledge and optimally facilitates exchange and new learning, and they have not drawn the lessons implicit in their shared (organizational) experience. As a consequence, neither the organization nor the individuals in it has the sense of fulfilling their potential and both the quality of the experience and the productivity of the group suffer to some extent. To move ahead as a group -- and better provide for the growth of the individuals within the group -- the first step often is to pay more attention to process: in other words,   
  

    * to examine how things are being done;  
  

    * to assess these patterns against norms of quality like democrary, efficiency, communication and learning; and  
  

    * to set up new patterns of activity that more directly promote individual learning and growth, and that make the organization a more functional community.  
  

We are talking, therefore, about collective or group phenomena. While grounded
in principles of adult learning, this course moves a step beyond the important
but largely individual focus of adult learning theory to consider how groups
facilitate (or impede) adult learning and the _processes_ by which their
potential for learning promotion is mobilized, organized and finally
institutionalized. That theme cuts across the many different kinds of
organizations that fulfill adult education functions. These include not just
institutions with a primary teaching vocation, like continuing education
centers, but others like businesses, community groups, public agencies and
voluntary associations that have, could have or should have facilitation of
adult learning (whether among their staff, their "clientele", or both) as an
important secondary function. In fact, the emergence and articulation of new
adult education functions within a vast spectrum of social institutions is
arguably one of the key trends of the new 21st century. Adult education
"program development" in its traditional sense -- that is, the design and
delivery of formal teaching or training programs for adults -- is a subset of
this larger system of activities, and one that we will study as well in the
course of the semester.

The objectives proposed for our work together are the following:

  * Discover and analyze the process dimension of the adult educators' role.
  * Understand its applications in different professional contexts and with a variety of different clienteles.
  * Be able to prescribe steps in process consultation or involvement-centered program development in a social setting with which the student is familiar.
  * Develop the capacity to use social and instructional theory in designing process-sensitive interventions.

The course is divided into three principal sections. In the first, we acquaint
ourselves with literature about the process dimension of social life and
learning and its dynamics: process consultation, instructional design,
knowledge-building and program develop-ment. The second section of the course
is devoted to examining different applications of a process approach in fields
as diverse as community development, social marketing, project design and
political organization. In the last section of the course, we hone in on adult
education program development per se in order to analyze the implications of
the principles and experiences reviewed up to that point for the professional
behavior of an adult educator.

There is no single text for this course, though we will make considerable use
of Edgar Schein's most recent work (1998), _Process Consultation Revisited_
and Rosemary Caffarella's book (1994) on _Planning Programs for Adult
Education._ Some of you may want to buy these. Other materials will be
provided to you in photocopied form. A number of resources and assignments
will be posted on our class website:

<http://www.fsu.edu/~adult-ed/ADE5380/>

In addition, we will make liberal use of resources that are on the Internet,
and, at various times, you will be expected to research others, either on the
web or in the Library.

Course expectations and the bases for grading are the following:

  1. Active participation in class and completion of readings and assignments. (15%)  
  

  2. Preparation of two short reflection papers (5 pages maximum exclusive of references) on each of the first two major sections of the course. (2 x 20%)  
  

  3. Identification and preparation of supplemental web-based, library and other information resources for two sessions of the course selected by the student (15%)  
  

  4. Completion of a take-home examination administered at the end of the semester..(30%)  
  

These expectations will be further discussed in class.

The syllabus hereafter presents the sequence, rationale and relationship of
topics covered in the course. A separate worksheet with reading assignments,
"mini-task" assignments, paper topics and advance organizers will be furnished
to you for each section of the course.

S Y L L A B U S

**I. PUTTING PROCESS IN FOCUS**

**Week 1 -- Introduction and Class Organization**

This introductory session will be devoted to getting to know each other,
organizing the course, discussing the requirements and previewing the material
to be covered in the first two weeks.

**Week 2 -- Process Theory and Process Thinking**

The topic is the fundamentals of "process thinking," their roots in philosophy
and their applications in a number of fields other than adult education. All
readings this first week can be found on the internet.

_Required readings:_

_On the philosophical roots of process:_

> B. L. Brown, _Applying constructivism in vocational and career education,_
first three chapters (pp. 1-25), found at
<http://ericacve.org/mp_brown_01.asp>.

>

> Trish Nichol, "Vygotsky", pp. 1-4, found at
<http://www.massey.ac.nz/~ALock/virtual/project2.htm>

>

> Stanford Encyclopedia, "Alfred North Whitehead", pp. 1-6, found at [
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/whitehead/](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/whitehead.index.html)

>

> Underwood, Mick, "Social learning," pp. 1-2, found at [
http://cuttsock.ndirect.co.uk/MYHome/csnum/psy/soclearn.html](http://cuttsock.ndirect.co.uk/MYHome/csnum/psy/soclearn.html)

_On process thinking_

> Robert Luttman, _Process Thinking_ , all sections plus pages on "Flow
charting", found at [
http://www.robertluttman.com/Week4/Week_4.htm](http://www.robertluttman.com/Week4/week_4.htm)

>

> Idea Group Publishing, Summary of _Process Think: Winning Perspectives for
Business Change in the Information Age_ by Vanun Grouver and William J.
Kettinger, pp. 1-9, found at [ http://www.idea-group.com/Process_Think_  
>  Winning_Perspectives_for_Business_  
>  Change_in_the_Information_Age.htm](http://www.idea-
group.com/Process_Think_Winning_Perspectives_for_Business_Change_in_the_Information_Age.htm)

**Week 3 - Process Consultation**

A review of the key works of Edgar Schein and proponents of the "helping
relationship" on how a process approach is applied to the facilitation of
organizational change and problem-solving.

_Required reading_

> Schein, Edgar (1998) _Process consultation revisited: Building the helping
relationship_ , Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley. Chapters 1-4 and 12.

**Week 4 -- Organizational Learning Environments**

We examine now how organizational environments constrain or facilitate
learning and the dynamics of their "mental" operations which process
consultants must very accurately assess.

_Required reading_

_For all_

> Morgan, Gareth (1992) _Images of Organization_. Newbury Park: Sage
Publications. Chapters 1, 4 and 5.

_Platooned_

> Leyman, Heinz and Kornbluh, Hy. (1991) _Socialization and Learning at Work_.
New York: Avery. Chapters 1 and 2.

>

> Marquardt, Michael (1996) Building Learning Organization. New York: McGraw-
Hill. Chapter 3.

**Week 5 - Instructional Design and Program Development _Alternate Topic:
Knowledge Building Communities_**

A review of some of the principles of instructional systems design as they
apply to the identification of organizational process and the creation of new
learning opportunities, and a comparison between these and the more
contextually oriented approaches of adult education. Class members already
familiar with those topics (e.g., ISD majors) will instead prepare and present
some of the fruit of current literature on knowledge-building communities for
the class.

> Clark, Don. "Introduction to Instructional Systems Design", pp. 1-14, found
at <http://www.nwlink.com/~donclark/hrd/sat1.html>

>

> Dick, Walter (1995) Instructional design and creativity: A response to the
critics. Educational Technology July-August: pp. 5-11.

>

> Boyle, Patrick (1981). Planning Better Programs. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Chapters 7 and 8.

>

> Grill, Jennifer (1998) "Programming in Adult Education," pp. 1-16, found at
<http://www.fsu.edu/~adult-ed/jenny/program.html>

**APPLYING THE PROCESS APPROACH**

**Week 6 -- Community Development and Voluntary Action**

_N.B.: **First reflection paper** due today_

process methods used by community developers and voluntary association
leadership in promoting their ends.

**Week 7 -- Social Marketing and Diffusion of Innovation**

An overview of the field of social marketing and innovation diffusion to
identify principles and techniques that can be of assistance in a process
approach to promoting learning.

**Week 8 -- Political Organizing**

A similar review of the rich experience of local political organizing and the
light it throws on how the potentials of groups are mobilized and
materialized.

**Week 9 -- Project Design**

Consideration of techniques for the development, design and funding of
research or social improvement projects in order to identify the light they
throw on process methodology.

**_Week 10 -- Spring Vacation_**

BECOMING COMPETENT IN PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT

**Week 11 -- Assessing Needs in a Process Vein**

_N.B.: **Second reflection paper** due today_

Types and techniques of needs assessment that help in identifying group
learning needs.

**Week 12 -- Participatory Design of Learning Programs**

Approaches to the actual design of course offerings or learning interventions
that provide both for the participation of stakeholders and the development of
effective instructional strategies.

**Week 13 -- Marketing, Coordinating and Delivering Program Offerings**

Lessons of experience from the effort to generate resources for learning
programs, "sell" continuing education and effectively deliver the goods.

**Week 14 -- Technology and Process: Making Optimum Use of the Tools**

The role of technology in facilitating group process and learning program
development: an overview of techniques and a critical review of approaches.

**CONCLUSIONS**

**Week 15 -- Reprise: Process Skills in Adult Education**

In this wrap-up session, we will attempt to crystallize what we have learned
in the course of the semester regarding the professional skills of process
facilitation and their many applications as well as their relation to program
development in adult education

**Week 16 -- Exam Week**

_N.B.: The **take-home final exam** will be distributed in class._

  
  
  
  
  
![](images/line1.jpg)  
Copyright  (C) Adult and Continuing Education Program  
All Rights Reserved  
Web Designer [Sumedi P. Nugraha](http://www.fsu.edu/~fsu-isc/sumedi/)  
  
  

