**COURSE HOMEPAGE FOR PUP 6009 - Public Policy Analysis**  
**Fall Semester 2002 \- University of Florida**  
**Thursday's 9:35am-12:35pm**  
**Political Science Seminar Room, 214 Anderson Hall**

**PLEASE NOTE CLASS MEETING LOCATION CHANGE 8/22/02**

![](line1.jpg)

 Professor: [Renee J. Johnson](../index.htm); 222 Anderson Hall  
Office Hours:  Wednesday 10:30-11:30am, 3:00-4:30pm; Thursday's after class  
Phone: 392-0262 ext. 289  
Email: [rjohnson@polisci.ufl.edu](mailto:rjohnson@polisci.ufl.edu)  


[![](line2.jpg)](mailto:rjohnson@polisci.ufl.edu)

  
**OBJECTIVES** |  **COURSE REQUIREMENTS** |  **READING MATERIALS**  
---|---|---  
**CLASS FORMAT** |  **CRITICAL REACTION** |  **[COURSE
CALENDAR](Calendar.htm)**  
  
    


**_OBJECTIVE_**

The objective of this course is to introduce students to the field of public
policy analysis. As such, this course builds on concepts discussed in advanced
undergraduate political science courses. Rather than focusing on the
institutions that make public policy, such as legislatures, presidents,
governors, and courts, or the groups that impact the policymaking process,
such as interest groups and the media; this course provides students with an
introduction to the tools used to analyze policies and a discussion of the
political elements that affect this analysis. The course will be composed of
several different elements: 1) a definition of public policy analysis 2) a
presentation of the basic economic and political tools used to analyze public
policies and 3) an analysis of the environment in which the policy analyst
works. Essentially, the goal is to ensure that students understand the basic
economic principles used to evaluate different public policy proposals.
However, as this is a political science course, other principal goals are to
highlight the weaknesses of some of these economic assumptions, discover how
politics may alter these otherwise sound assumptions, and examine the
political environment in which policies are analyzed and adopted.

**_COURSE REQUIREMENTS_**

Class participation is an essential component of the requirements for
successful completion of this class. Participation consists of being on time
for class, being present in class, having read all assignments prior to the
beginning of class, and being an active member in discussion sessions. Being
on-time for class is important because very often housekeeping matters are
taken care of in the beginning of class.  If you miss the beginning of the
class it is your responsibility to find out what information you missed.
Similarly, I very often cover material that is not in the readings during my
class presentations, if you are not in class, you will miss this material.
Because a premium is placed on participation, this comprises 15% of your total
grade. Additionally, I require the completion of four (4) critical summary
statements which respond to the articles assigned for the course. Completion
of a term paper is also required and composes 30% of the final grade. Due
dates for the papers are noted on the course calendar portion of this website.
Finally, two exams comprise the remaining 40% of the grade. Thus, the final
grade breakdown looks like this:

Class Participation 15%

Critical Reaction Statements 15%

Term Paper 30%

Two Exams 40%  


**_TERM PAPER_**

For most students, the course term paper will take the form of a problem-
solution analysis.  Information on this paper project and the content and
structure of the project can be found in Chapter 10 of the Weimer & Vining
book and the Bardach book.  The structure and content of the paper will be
discussed thorougly in class on September 12th.  Students are responsible for
this information whether or not they attend class that day.  The final paper
should be approximately 20-25 pages in length, be computer-generated, have 1
inch margins all around and be in 11 point Times New Roman font.
Additionally, the paper should have an appropriate title, bibliography, and
any appendices necessary.  The term paper is due at 6pm on December 5th at my
home.  Students will also be asked to provide a BRIEF presentation of their
paper topic on December 5th.

**_READING MATERIALS_**

The following books comprise the main texts we will use this semester in this
course and have been ordered using the online textbook ordering system
endorsed by the University of Florida.  As such, the books should be available
at a variety of local bookstores in town, including, but not limited to:  The
Hub, The Florida Book Store, and University Book and Supply.

*Bardach, Eugene.  2000\. _A Practical Guide for Policy Analysis_.   New York, NY:  Chatham House Publishers.

Caporaso, James A. and David P. Levine.  1992\. _Theories of Political
Economy_.   Cambridge, MA:  Cambridge University Press.

*Levy, John M.  1995\. _Essential Microeconomics for Public Policy Analysis_.   Westport, CT:  Praeger Press.

Stone, Deborah. 1997. _Policy Paradox: The Art of Political Decision Making_.
New York: W.W. Norton  & Company.

Weimer, David L. and Aidan R. Vining. 1999\. _Policy Analysis: Concepts and
Practice_ , 3rd Edition. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. [W&V]

All of the supplemental readings listed on the course calendar are available
online using WebLuis/JSTOR or through the instructor.

*The Levy text will be listed in the assigned readings, however, students who are familiar with microeconomics may not find it necessary to purchase the text.  The Bardach text is also part of the assigned readings and is directly related to the master's degree paper assignment for the course. It expands on information presented in the Weimer and Vining text. I believe master's degree students will find this book to be extremely helpful for completing the term paper.

**_CLASS FORMAT_**

Most class sessions will consist of a combination of lecturing and discussion
on the assigned topics. Because of the nature of some of the material we will
be covering at the beginning of the class, there will be more lecturing than
is customary in a graduate seminar. However, you are still expected to have
read the assignments listed for a particular class session before that class
session.

**_CRITICAL REACTION STATEMENTS_**

You may complete one critical reaction statement for any of the weeks listed
on the syllabus in which readings are assigned. The only reading for which
critical reaction statements should not be prepared are the Levy and Bardach
texts.  The critical reactions statements are due at the beginning of class -
no late papers will be accepted. The statements should be typed, double-
spaced, ABSOLUTELY no more than two pages in length, and have one-inch margins
all around in 11 point Times New Roman font. In fact, one well-constructed
page is usually all that is required. These statements should not simply
summarize the article. I want you to engage the author by challenging
assumptions, noting the importance/relevance of the piece, extending the work,
or highlighting any questions that remain unanswered. The word "critical" in
critical reaction statement does NOT mean that you have to discuss how bad the
article is; it means "marked by careful evaluation". Nonetheless, I don't want
all four of your summaries to discuss how wonderfully written each article is.
Four of these statements should be completed by the end of the semester; which
readings you choose to respond to is completely up to you (subject to
provisions listed above).  Please keep in mind that there are nine weeks for
which you will have an opportunity to respond to the readings ending on
November 14th, 2002.  It is your responsibility to keep track of how many
critical reactions you have completed.  If you need to complete four critical
reactions and there are only three weeks of readings left, you will only be
able to turn in 3 critical reactions.  NO EXCEPTIONS...YOU HAVE ADVANCE
WARNING!  Keep in mind that critical reaction papers will generally be
returned the week after you turn them in.

[This web page last updated August 22, 2002](../index.htm)  


[![](lnk_rg2.gif)](http://www.ender-design.com/rg/index.html)[Images and
Backgrounds for this web page provided by Realm Graphics.](http://www.ender-
design.com/rg/index.html)

