**The University of Tennessee**  
---  
  
|

# Department of History

| ![](images/top-image.jpg)  
---|---  
  
| [![Home](images/home.gif)](default.html) | [![Graduate
Program](images/grad.gif)](graduate.htm) | [![Undergraduate
Program](images/undrgrad.gif)](undergrad.htm) | [![Faculty and
Staff](images/faculty.gif)](faculty.htm) | [![Lectures and
Workshops](images/lectures.gif)](lectures.htm) |
[![Newsletter](images/newslet.gif)](newslet.htm) | [![Supporting the
Department](images/support.gif)](support.htm) | [![Online
Resources](images/online.gif)](online.htm)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
![](images/spacer.gif)  
  
|

[Graduate Program](graduate.htm)  
---  
  
![](images/spacer.gif) \- [Application](g-app.htm)  
  
![](images/spacer.gif)\- [Requirements](g-requir.htm)  
  
![](images/spacer.gif)\- [Financial Support](g-financ.htm)  
![](images/spacer.gif)\- [Courses](g-course.htm)  
![](images/spacer.gif)\- [Grad Students](g-students.htm)  
  
![](images/spacer.gif)\- [Alumni Profiles](g-alumni.htm)  
  
![](images/spacer.gif)\- [Q & A](g-questn.htm)  
  


  ![](images/1p-trans.gif) |

## Graduate Courses in History

The following list of graduate courses is taken from the History section of
the  _[Graduate Catalog 2000-2001](http://web.utk.edu/~gsinfo/toc.htm)_. Not
all courses are offered every semester.

**500 Thesis** (1-15) P/NP only. E.

**502 Registration for Use of Facilities** (3-15) Required for the student not
otherwise registered during any semester when student uses University
facilities and/or faculty time before degree is completed. May not be used
toward degree requirements. May be repeated. S/NC only. E

**510 Foundations of Graduate Study in History** (3) Assumptions and methods
of historians. Required of all candidates for advanced degrees. F

**511 Teaching World Civilization** (3) Methodology, conceptualization,
historiography, text-book selection and syllabus construction to prepare
students to teach courses in world civilization.

**512 Teaching Western Civilization** (3) Methodology, conceptualization,
historiography, text-book selection and syllabus construction to prepare
students to teach courses in western civilization.

**513 Teaching United States History** (3) Methodology, conceptualization,
historiography, text-book selection and syllabus construction to prepare
students to teach courses in U.S. history.

**521 M.A. Readings** (3) Directed readings in preparation for M.A.
examinations. Open only to master's candidates in history. May be repeated.
Maximum 6 hrs. S/NC only.

**531 Topics in Premodern Europe** (3) Reading seminar: secondary sources on
premodern European movements and trends. Focus varies. May be repeated.
Maximum 15 hrs.

**532 Topics in Modern Europe** (3) Reading seminar: secondary sources on
movements and trends that are multinational in focus. Focus varies. May be
repeated. Maximum 15 hrs.

**533 Topics in European National History** (3) Reading seminar: secondary
sources on intra-national topics, usually British, Russian, German or French.
Focus varies. May be repeated. Maximum 15 hrs.

**541 Topics in Early American History** (3) Reading seminar: secondary
sources on early North American history. Focus varies. May be repeated.
Maximum 15 hrs.

**542 Topics in 19th-Century United States** (3) Reading seminar: secondary
sources on 19th-century United States. Focus varies. May be repeated. Maximum
15 hrs.

**543 Topics in 20th-Century United States** (3) Reading seminar: secondary
sources on 20th-century U.S. Focus varies. May be repeated. Maximum 15 hrs.

**544 Topics in U.S. Environmental History** (3) Reading seminar: secondary
sources on U.S. environmental history. Focus varies. May be repeated. Maximum
15 hrs.

**551 Topics in the History of Foreign Relations** (3) Reading seminar:
secondary sources on foreign relations. Focus varies. May be repeated. Maximum
15 hrs.

**552 Topics in Military History** (3) Reading seminar: secondary sources on
military history; military operations, social impact of war and naval strategy
in foreign policy. May be repeated. Maximum 15 hrs.

**555 Topics in United States Social and Economic History** (3) Reading
seminar: secondary sources on U.S. social and economic history. Focus varies.
May be repeated. Maximum 15 hrs.

**556 Topics in European Social and Economic History** (3) Reading seminar:
secondary sources on social or economic history of European nations. Focus
varies. May be repeated. Maximum 15 hrs.

**557 Topics in Cultural and Intellectual History** (3) Reading seminar:
secondary sources on cultural and intellectual history. Focus varies. May be
repeated. Maximum 15 hrs.

**558 Topics in United States Regional and Local History** (3) Reading
seminar: secondary sources on regions, states and cities of the South. Focus
varies. May be repeated. Maximum 15 hrs.

**559 Topics in Jewish History** (3) Reading seminar: secondary sources on
Jewish history. Focus varies. May be repeated. Maximum 15 hrs.

**561 Topics in Latin American History** (3) Reading seminar: secondary
sources in Latin America. Focus varies. May be repeated. Maximum 15 hrs.

**562 Topics in Asian History** (3) Reading seminar: secondary sources on
Asian history; East Asia and Middle East. Focus varies. May be repeated.
Maximum 15 hrs.

**580 Topics in History** (3) Reading seminar: secondary sources for new
topics. Focus varies. May be repeated. Maximum 15 hrs.

**585 Topics in World History** (3) Reading seminar in transnational themes
involving analysis of two or more world cultures. Focus varies. May be
repeated. Maximum 9 hrs.

**591 Foreign Study** (1-15) See College of Arts and Sciences.

**592 Off-Campus Study** (1-15) See College of Arts and Sciences.

**593 Independent Study** (1-15) See College of Arts and Sciences.

**600 Doctoral Research and Dissertation** (3-15) P/NP only. E

**621 Directed Readings** (3) Directed readings to prepare candidate for
doctoral comprehensive examination. May be repeated. Maximum 1 per doctoral
field. S/NC only.

**632 Seminar in Modern European History** (3) Research seminar in primary
sources culminating in scholarly paper in modern European history. Focus
varies. May be repeated. Maximum 15 hrs.

**642 Seminar in 19th-Century United States** (3) Research seminar in primary
sources culminating in scholarly paper in 19th-century U.S. history. Focus
varies. May be repeated. Maximum 15 hrs.

**643 Seminar in 20th-Century United States** (3) Research seminar in primary
sources culminating in scholarly paper in 20th-century U.S. history. Focus
varies. May be repeated. Maximum 15 hrs.

**651 Seminar in Military and Foreign Relations History** (3) Research seminar
in primary sources culminating in scholarly paper in military or foreign
relations history. Focus varies. Not restricted by national grouping. May be
repeated. Maximum 15 hrs.

**658 Seminar in United States Regional and Local History** (3) Research
seminar in primary sources culminating in scholarly paper in regional and
local history. Focus varies. May be repeated. Maximum 15 hrs.

[top of page]  
  
![](images/spacer.gif)  
---  
  
| [![Home](images/home.gif)](default.html) | [![Graduate
Program](images/grad.gif)](graduate.htm) | [![Undergraduate
Program](images/undrgrad.gif)](undergrad.htm) | [![Faculty and
Staff](images/faculty.gif)](faculty.htm) | [![Lectures and
Workshops](images/lectures.gif)](lectures.htm) |
[![Newsletter](images/newslet.gif)](newslet.htm) | [![Supporting the
Department](images/support.gif)](support.htm) | [![Online
Resources](images/online.gif)](online.htm)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  


