** HISTORY 5 COURSE SYLLABUS **  
  
_**Note: Scroll down to the section titled, "Criteria for Evaluation" in order
to find the links to chapter questions and the analytical assignment._**  
  
**A. Course Description:  
** History 5 reviews the course of Western Civilization from 1660 to the
present, concentrating on the history of Western Europe. It provides a general
account of those forces and events that have shaped developments in the
Twentieth Century.  
**B. Course Objectives:**  
1\. Students will demonstrate a basic knowledge of the key events ,
individuals, and themes that have shaped western civilization from 1660; they
will also demon- strate a working knowledge of the chronology involved.  
2\. Students will develop an understanding of and an appreciation for the
integrative, holistic, historical development of modern western civilization.  
3\. Students will be able to assess the impact of western institutions and
ideas upon non-western societies and cultures as well as the influence of non-
western cultures and peoples upon western societies and cultures. They will be
able to compare and contrast the manner in which different cultures have
confronted common themes and challenges.  
4\. Students will analyze representative works from different civilizations,
and evaluate what they tell us about the culture that produced them.  
5\. Students will demonstrate an understanding of and an appreciation for how
historians operate. Specifically, they will experience: methods of organizing
and re cording information; testing methods; distinguishing fact from opinion;
the importance of historical distance, reflection, and revision; the use of
numerous and sometimes conflicting sources; the use of the past in an attempt
to understand the present and speculate about (and prepare for) the future.  
6\. Students will demonstrate a clear understanding of the geography of the
area under study and the role of geography in the development of global
regions.  
**C. Reading Materials:**  
Perry, Marvin et al. Sources of the Western Tradition. Vol. 2. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 1999  
  
**D. Course Outline - Reading Assignments:**  
Dates Topics Chapters  
  
Jan 23 - Feb 15 **INTRODUCTION** Text, 1-3  
Prelude to the 18th Century  
  
**AN AGE OF ENLIGHTENMENT**  
  
  
Feb18 - Apr 5 **WARS, REVOLUTIONS,** Text 4-9  
**INNOVATIONS, TRANSITION**  
Competition and Struggle XVIII  
Among the Great Powers  
La Revolution et Napoleon  
Revolution in Industry  
Ideologies that shaped  
19th Century Europe  
  
Apr 8 - May 20 **THE MODERN AGE** Text 11-14  
The Death of an Age, WWI:  
Details, Impact XX  
Revolution in Russia  
Futile Search for a New  
Stability: Europe Between  
the Wars  
The Second World Wide  
Conflict: Entering a New Age  
Cold War and a New Europe to  
1970  
The Western World Today/  
Implications for the 21st Century  
  
**E. Significant Dates:  
**  
Mon. Jan 21 - Martin Luther King, Jr. Holiday - No Classes  
Fri. Feb 15 - Lincoln's Birthday - No Classes  
Mon. Feb 18- Presidents' Day - No Classes  
Wed. Feb 27- First Paper DUE  
Mon. Mar 11 - First Exam  
SPRING BREAK --- March 29 - April 2  
Mon Apr 8 - Second Paper DUE  
Fri. Apr 19 - Second Exam  
Wed. May 22 - Final Examination - 10-12 noon  
  
  
  
**F. Criteria for Evaluation:  
**  
[Quizzes/Group Work, Etc_](perry.html) (20%)  
  
Two Unit Examinations (30%)  
  
[Two Short Analytical Papers_](case.html) (20%)  
  
Comprehensive Final Exam (30%)  
  
**G. Additional Notes:  
** 1\. This is a completely transferable, college level history course and it
is there fore designed with the expectation of the student's prior mastery of
college level read ing and writing skills. Students who have not yet mastered
these skills should consi der taking this course at a later time or making use
of the Reading/Writing Laboratory and college tutoring services. A prior
college level history course is also strongly recommended.  
2\. The method of instruction in this course is primarily lecture/discussion.
This requires the student to spend sufficient time outside of class studying
and preparing for various means of participation. Clearly, considerable time
should be spent in read ing, research for papers, and review for quizzes and
exams.  
3\. Exams can only be made up with the instructor's prior knowledge and
permission. The make ups, if granted, may differ from the originals.  
4\. Regular attendance is crucial. Regular in class assignments (quizzes,
groupwork, etc. **cannot be made up**. If a student's absences in a specific
class exceed the number of times the class meets per week, the student may be
dropped from the class. As the semester nears an end, however, the student
should not assume that the instructor will automatically drop him/her. It is
the student's responsibility to make sure that his/her record is cleared with
the Admissions Office.  
5\. There are **NO** extra credit options in this class. The variety of
assignments and activities already allow for different learning styles and
interests. Concentrate on your established assignments and exams, etc. and you
should not be in a position to need extra credit at the end of the semester.  
6\. Cheating is unethical, disrespectful, and illegal; it will not be
tolerated. If you are caught cheating, you will receive an automatic zero on
the assignment in question. If cheating persists, other school authorities
will become involved.  
7\. Please be respectful of your instructor and other students and turn off
all pagers and telephones during class.  
8\. Students are responsible for **all** subsequent verbal and written
announce ments and instructions.

* * *

Return to [MF Jones_](http://crc.losrios.edu/~jonesmf) homepage

