             

[Course
Calendar](http://www.wheaton.edu/psychology/faculty/tmb/psyc711/psyc711.html#calendar)
|| [PsyD Program](http://www.wheaton.edu/Psychology/PsyD/index.htm) ||
[Wheaton College](http://www.wheaton.edu/)

**PSYC 711: History and Systems/Integration**  
  
---  
  
**WHAT 'S NEW**

**4/25:   A couple of small changes have been made to the course calendar re.
the final weeks of the semester (i.e., dropping some reading summaries and
meeting on 5/9)**

3/25:  Please note calendar changes to Weeks 11, 12, 13, and 15

2/6:  Reading guide for Week 5 link created; please note update Reading
Summary instructions

1/22:  Please note calendar changes for Weeks 9-12 (see below)  
  
**General Information**  
Course Number: PSYC 711   | Semester: Spring 2002  
Time: Thursday, 1:15-4:50  | Location: BGC 252  
Instructors:  
[Trey Buchanan, Ph.D.](http://www.wheaton.edu/psychology/faculty/tmb/tmb.html)
| Phone: 752-5753 | E-mail:
[Trey.Buchanan@wheaton.edu](mailto:Trey.Buchanan@wheaton.edu)  
[Mark McMinn, Ph.D.](http://www.wheaton.edu/psychology/faculty/mrm/index.htm)
| Phone: 752-7034 | E-mail:
[Mark.R.McMinn@wheaton.edu](mailto:Mark.R.McMinn@wheaton.edu)  
  


**COURSE GOALS AND OBJECTIVES**

As an early requirement in the doctoral program in clinical psychology, this
course will challenge you to 1) examine critically the development of our
discipline in historical context and 2) to explore the task of integrating
psychology with Christian faith and practice. To achieve this goal, three
broad areas of scholarly inquiry will be of primary interest to us:  history,
philosophy, and theology. Our hope is that this course will provide a fertile
opportunity to engage in the kind of in-depth, self-reflective intellectual
process that lies at the heart of the practitioner-scholar training model.

To understand psychology properly as a field of study--and clinical psychology
as an applied profession--we must be historically informed. Where, when, and
how did psychology emerge as such a field and profession?  What cultural
forces helped to shape the field over time?  In what ways has psychology
related to religion, especially Protestant Christianity?  Part of our task in
this course will involve historically examining the field of psychology in
order to address these and related questions.

Because of psychology's roots in the Western intellectual tradition,
understanding the various philosophical assumptions--metaphysical,
epistemological, moral--that have guided psychologists is an additional area
we will examine in this course. More specifically, the philosophy of science
and that of social science demand that we think hard about the reasons
psychologists tend to favor certain research methods and theoretical
approaches. Issues like these are seldom raised in the process of professional
training or practice; therefore we want you to begin now asking the big
questions of your discipline.

As members of the Christian community, we will explore together the
implications of our Christian commitments for our study of the field of
psychology. For the sake of integrity in our intellectual pursuits, the
integration of Christian faith with the study of the discipline of psychology
will be a major focus throughout the course. We hope in this course to
facilitate your effective and responsible involvement in this task. This
course will be a time for us to explore together what it means to engage in
the often ambiguous task of integration.

Finally, we want to make mention of the team-taught nature of this course.
Since its inception in 1994, this course has sought to bring together scholars
(some in person, some in print) who would represent the variety of sources and
ways of thinking inherent in the integrative mission of the Psy.D. program.
Bearing both the markings of our primary disciplines (i.e., developmental and
clinical) and a sensitivity to others, we will offer distinct perspectives
that nonetheless attempt to converse and learn from one another. We also want
to draw upon Wheaton College's strength as a liberal arts college by exposing
you to issues that cut across disciplinary boundaries and tie together
psychologists, philosophers, theologians, and many others searching for truth
and wisdom.

**CLASS SESSIONS**  
  
Each class session will primarily focus on discussing the readings assigned
for that week (see class calendar below). Since the course will be run in a
seminar format, each of us is responsible for adding to the quality of our
discussions, although we, as instructors, will try to guide their structure
and content. Each week you will be given guidelines to help focus your reading
(see links in course calendar). Because of the length of our class sessions,
each will contain several breaks; we'll try not to go more than 60 minutes
without giving ourselves a chance to stretch our legs and brains.  
  


**REQUIRED TEXTS**

Below are listed the texts required for this course; all are available at the
college bookstore. If purchasing all books seems daunting to you, you may be
able to find someone who has taken the course in the past several years
willing to loan you a copy of any of the * titles below. Any additional
reading materials will be placed on reserve in the PsyD reading room.  
  
              Cushman, P. (1995).  _Constructing the self, constructing America_.   Reading, MA:  Addison-Wesley.*

Jones, D., & Elcock, J. (2001). _History and theories of psychology:   A
critical perspective_. London: Arnold.

              Johnson, E. L., & Jones, S. L. (Eds.) (2000).  _Psychology & Christianity: Four views_.  Downers                 Grove, IL.* 

**  
OPTIONAL TEXTS**

The following readings are available in the Psy.D. Reading Room. They cannot
be put on electronic reserve because copyright laws prohibit putting more than
one chapter from a single book or one article from a single journal on
electronic reserve.

Jones, S. L. (2001). An apologetic apologia for the integration of psychology
& theology. In M. R. McMinn and T. R. Phillips (Eds.), _Care for the soul:
Exploring the intersection of psychology & theology _(pp. 62-77). Downers
Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press.

McMinn, M. R. (2001). Introduction: Psychology, theology & care for the soul.
In M. R. McMinn and T. R. Phillips (Eds.), _Care for the soul: Exploring the
intersection of psychology & theology _(pp. 9-22). Downers Grove, IL:
InterVarsity Press.

McMinn, M. R. (1996).  _Psychology, theology, and spirituality in Christian
counseling_.   Wheaton, IL:  
Tyndale. Chapters 1-5.

                Powlison, D. (2001). Questions at the crossroads: The care of souls & modern psychotherapies. In M.                 R. McMinn and T. R. Phillips (Eds.), _Care for the soul: Exploring the intersection of psychology &                 theology _(pp. 23-61). Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press.  
  
**ELECTRONIC RESERVE  
** In addition to text books, through out the semester we will place articles
and book chapters on electronic reserve accessible via Buswell Library's web
site (look under PSYC 711).  Currently these items include the following
(addition ones may be added as the semester progresses):

[Bouma-Prediger, S. (1990).  The task of integration: A modest proposal.
_Journal of Psychology and_ _Theology_ , _18_ ,
21-31.](http://reserves.wheaton.edu/pdf/boum08010802.pdf)

[Buchanan, T. (2001, August 25). _Historically grounding the practice of
psychology:   Implications for professional training._ Paper presented at the
American Psychological Association, San Francisco,
CA.](http://reserves.wheaton.edu/pdf/buch13011502.pdf)

[Canning, S. S., Pozzi, C. F., McNeil, J. D., & McMinn, M. R. (2000).
Integration as service: Implications of faith-praxis integration for training.
_Journal of Psychology and Theology_ , _28_ ,
201-211.](http://reserves.wheaton.edu/pdf/cann08010802.pdf)

Roberts, R. C. (Winter, 2001). Psychology and Christian ministry. _Word and
World, 22,_ 42-50.

[Smith, R. (1997).  The unconscious:  Reason and unreason.  In _The Norton
history of the human sciences_ (pp. 701-745).   New York:
Norton.](http://reserves.wheaton.edu/pdf/smit16022801.pdf)  
  
  
**ASSIGNMENTS AND GRADING **  
There will be five ways in which your academic performance in PSYC 711 will be
evaluated:  



1.  **_Reaction Paper._** Write a reaction paper, 5-6 pages in length, to the following statement:   "The care of souls should occur in the context of  the Church."  Simply arguing that this statement is obviously correct or obviously incorrect will not make a strong paper.  Be sure to consider the potential complexities, strengths, and weaknesses of such an assertion, drawing upon assigned readings and class discussions. The paper is due by 1:15 p.m. on April 11.  This paper will be worth 22% of your final grade. 



2.  **_Group Presentation_.** In groups of 4-5, prepare a formal class presentation outlining and evaluating the major contributions of one of the following scholars: Gary R. Collins, David Powlison, David G. Myers, and Robert C. Roberts.    This presentation will be worth 22% of your final grade.



3.  **_Reading Summaries & Questions_**.  By the Tuesday before each of our history sessions (see course calendar), you will are required to email to [Dr. Buchanan](mailto:Trey.Buchanan@wheaton.edu) a 1) summary of the reading assigned for that week (one paragraph for each paper, chapter or article assigned) and 2) two questions you would like the class to discuss pertaining to the reading.  Please include the summaries and question as text within your email rather than as a separate attachment.  You will typically be provided with information and questions to guide your reading (see links in course calendar).  Each summary/question will be assigned a letter grade (see scale below) and averaged together and will account for 22% of your final grade.



4.  **_Cushman Review Essay_.** The final writing assignment is a 3000 word, APA style review essay of Philip Cushman's _Constructing the Self, Constructing America_ (1995) in which you articulate the ways in which your vision of an integrated psychology 1) relates to the various historical, culturally embedded selves described by Cushman, and 2) offers a possible alternative to traditional psychotherapies. A fuller description of the assignment can be found by clicking [here](http://www.wheaton.edu/psychology/faculty/tmb/psyc711/cushmanessay.html).  This paper will be worth 22% of your final grade. 



5.  **_Class Participation_.** To encourage your engagement in the material covered in PSYC 711, you be graded on active participation in class discussions. You are expected to come to class having completed all assigned reading and to actively listen and verbally interact with the ideas central the historical and integrative issues we cover. Please feel free to ask for feedback from Dr. McMinn or Dr. Buchanan regarding your participation at any time during the semester. (12% of final grade)  

Final grades in PSYC 711 will be determined by summing the weighed (by the
percentage points above) grade points received on each assignment (all
assignments will be assigned letter grades using the following scale:  A =
4.00, A- = 3.66, B+ = 3.33, B = 3.00, B- = 2.66, C = 2.00, F = 0.00).

_Final Grade = (Reaction Paper x 0.22) +   (Group Presentation x 0.22) +
(Reading Summaries x 0.22) + (Cushman Review x 0.22) + (Class Participation x
0.12)_

**LATE ASSIGNMENTS  
** Any assignments not completed by the specified deadline will be
automatically lowered one full letter grade.  In the event that an unusual or
unavoidable circumstance impacts your ability to complete an assignment,
please contact Dr. Buchanan or Dr. McMinn at least 24 hours in advance if at
all possible. Be aware that computer or printer malfunctions are not
acceptable excuses for failing to turn in a written assignment on time.

**PLAGIARISM**  
In this course, plagiarism and cheating will not be tolerated (see policies on
academic integrity in the Psychology Department's _PsyD Handbook_ as well as
the Wheaton College academic catalog).   Plagiarism is use of text or ideas
without giving proper credit to the person who originated them.  In this
course, plagiarism--that is, representing others' work as your own--is most
often committed in the copying of text or using previous graded assignments
from former students.  Remember that a course grade and graduate career could
be jeopardized by cheating and or plagiarism.  
  
** **

** **

**  
PSYC 711 SPRING 2002 CALENDAR** ****



Week

|



Date

|



Topic

|

Primary Instructor

|



Assignment  
  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
1

|

1/17

|

**Introduction**

**Course Overview**

|

Buchanan  
McMinn

|

Course Syllabus  
  
2

|

1/24

|

_Integration 1_

[**Types of Integration and Personal
Integration**](http://www.wheaton.edu/psychology/faculty/mrm/Courses/Psyc711.htm)
****

|

McMinn

|

[Bouma-Prediger (1990)](http://reserves.wheaton.edu/pdf/boum08010802.pdf);
Johnson & Jones (2000), Ch. 1; McMinn (2001)  
  
3

|

1/31

|

_History 1  _

**[Why Study the History of
Psychology?](http://www.wheaton.edu/psychology/faculty/tmb/psyc711/history1.html)**

_(Email summary/questions by Tuesday)_

|

Buchanan

|

[Buchanan (2001)](http://reserves.wheaton.edu/pdf/buch13011502.pdf)  
Jones & Elcock (2001), Introduction, Ch. 1  
  
4

|

2/7

|

_Integration 2  _

[**Interdisciplinary Integration: Biblical
Counseling**](http://www.wheaton.edu/psychology/faculty/mrm/Courses/Psyc711.htm)

2:00 conversation with Dr. Powlison ****

|

McMinn

|

Johnson & Jones (2000), Ch. 5; Powlison (2001)

_Group Presentation_ (David Powlison)  
  
5

|

2/14

|

_History 2  
_**[Psychology before Psychology?  
The Founding of Modern
Psychology](http://www.wheaton.edu/psychology/faculty/tmb/psyc711/history2.html)**

_(Email summary/questions by Tuesday)_ ****

|

Buchanan

|

Jones & Elcock (2001), Ch. 2-4  
  
6

|

2/21

|

_Integration 3  _

[**Interdisciplinary Integration: Christian
Psychology**](http://www.wheaton.edu/psychology/faculty/mrm/Courses/Psyc711.htm)

2:00 conversation with Dr. Roberts

  ****

|

McMinn

|

Johnson & Jones (2000), Ch. 4;

Roberts (2001)

_Group Presentation_ (Robert C. Roberts)  
  
7

|

2/28

|

_History 3_

**[Psychoanalysis:   Origins and
Issues](http://www.wheaton.edu/psychology/faculty/tmb/psyc711/history3.html)**

_(Email summary/questions by Tuesday)_ ****

|

Buchanan

|

Jones & Elcock (2001), Ch. 5; [Smith
(1997)](http://reserves.wheaton.edu/pdf/smit16022801.pdf); Video:  _Freud
Under Analysis_ (PBS/NOVA)  
  
8

|

3/7

|

_Integration 4  _

[**Interdisciplinary Integration:
Integration**](http://www.wheaton.edu/psychology/faculty/mrm/Courses/Psyc711.htm)

1:15 conversation with Dr. Jones ****

|

McMinn

|

Johnson & Jones (2000), Ch. 3; Jones (2001)

_Group Presentation_ (Gary R. Collins)  
  


|



|

**SPRING BREAK**

|



|

  
  
9

|

3/21

|

_Integration 5_

[**Intradisciplinary
Integration**](http://www.wheaton.edu/psychology/faculty/mrm/Courses/Psyc711.htm)
__

|

McMinn

|

McMinn (1996), Ch. 1-5

  
  
10

|

3/28

|

_Integration 6_

[**Interdisciplinary Integration: Levels-of-
Explanation**](http://www.wheaton.edu/psychology/faculty/mrm/Courses/Psyc711.htm)

2:00 conversation with Dr. Myers ****

|

McMinn

|

Johnson & Jones (2000), Ch. 2

_Group Presentation_ (David G. Myers)  
  
11

|

4/4

|

_History 4_

**[Psychology, Science and
Culture](http://www.wheaton.edu/psychology/faculty/tmb/psyc711/history4.html)**

_(Email summary/questions by Tuesday)_ ****

|

Buchanan



|

Jones & Elcock (2001), Ch. 6, 9, 10, 11  
  
12

|

4/11

|

_History 5_

**[Psychotherapy and American
Culture](http://www.wheaton.edu/psychology/faculty/tmb/psyc711/history5.html)  
 **

_(Email summary/questions by Tuesday)_ ****

|

Buchanan

|

Jones & Elcock (2001), Ch.15; Cushman (1995), Ch. 1-3



_Reaction Paper Due_  
  
13

|

4/18

|

_History 6_

**[Psychotherapy and America in the 20 th
Century](http://www.wheaton.edu/psychology/faculty/tmb/psyc711/history6.html)**

_(Email questions by Tuesday)_ ****

|

Buchanan

|

Cushman (1995), Ch. 4-7  
  
14

|

4/25

|

_Integration 7_

[**Faith/Praxis
Integration**](http://www.wheaton.edu/psychology/faculty/mrm/Courses/Psyc711.htm)

|

McMinn

|

[Canning, Pozzi, McNeil, & McMinn
(2000)](http://reserves.wheaton.edu/pdf/cann08010802.pdf)

Johnson & Jones (2000), Ch. 6  
  
15

|

5/2

|

_History 7_

**[The Future of
Psychotherapy?](http://www.wheaton.edu/psychology/faculty/tmb/psyc711/history7.html)**

_(Email questions by Tuesday)_ ****

|

Buchanan

|

Cushman (1995), Ch. 8-10  
  
Finals

|

5/9

|

**_Cushman Paper due Tuesday, May 7_**

|

--

|

--  
  




