  |  **NEW YORK UNIVERSITY**  
**G57.1750 PUBLIC HISTORY SEMINAR:**  
**SOCIAL ACTIVISM IN A METROPOLITAN CULTURE**

Prof. P. H. Mattingly Dept of History

Thurs 4:00-6:00 Seminar - Rm 532

KJCC - 53 Wash Sq So FALL SYLLABUS 1998

**Some References:**

Binder, Frederick M and Reimers, David. _All the Nations Under Heaven: A
Racial History of New York City_ (1995)

Cary, Francine C (eds) _Urban Odyssey: A Multicultural History of Washington
DC_ (1996)

Dargan, Amanda and Steven Zeitlin (eds) _City Play_ (1991)

Foner, Nancy (ed) _New Immigrants in New York_ (1987)

Gardner, James B. and George R Adams (eds) _Ordinary People and Everyday Life_
(1983)

Howe, Barbara and Emery Kemp (eds) _Public History: An Introduction_ (1986)

Jackson, John Brickerhoff, _Discovering the Vernacular andscape_ (1984)

Jackson, Kenneth (ed) _The Encyclopedia of New York City_ (1996)

Leone, Mark and Neil Silberman (eds), _Invisible America_ (1996)

Lowenthal, David, _The Past is a Foreign Country_ (1985)

_Oral History Review_ , vols 1-26.

_The Public Historian_ vols. 1-20 (1978-98).  

Schlereth, Thomas, (ed) _Material Culture Studies in America_ (1982)

Upton, Dell and John Michael Vlach (eds), _Common Places: Readings in American
Vernacular Architecture_ (1986)

**Required Reading** :

Benson, Susan Porter,Brier, Stephen, Rosenzweig, Roy. _Presenting the Past:
Essays on History and the Public_ (1986) [E175.8/B83]

Dolores Hayden, _The Power of Place: Urban Landscapes as Public History_
(1996)

Ira Katznelson, _City Trenches: Urban Politics and the Patterning of Class in
the United States_ (1981) [JS1240.W37]

Michael B Katz (ed) _The Underclass Debate_ [HV4044.U56]

Roy Rosenstone, _Visions of the Past_ (1995) [PN1995.2/.R67]

Mike Wallace, _Mickey Mouse History and Other Essays on American Memory_
(1997)

**Course Requirements**

This academic year, 1998-1999, the Introductory course will concentrate on the
problem of "Social Activism in a Metropolitan Culture." The point of our
research and public presentations (in day-long Workshop in May, 1999) will be
the reconstruction of activist social and politcal groups in New York City.
Some possible loci for research papers include schools, religion, community
organizations, churches as well as contested public spaces illuminated by
street parades, public park usage and varied forms of cityplay, not to mention
pressure groups on various portions of the body politic. Indeed one of our
most effective strategies in the past has been to connect our research to
distinctive public spaces (architecture, park, street), where multiple
cultures interact and design a conscious strategy for social change.
Invariably at such flashpoints there is a clash between and among distinctive
cultural landscapes.

This year we will not designate any particular host institution, as we have
done in previous projects. However, it may be helpful to note that since 1981
the program in Public History has worked with numerous activist organization
and has compiled a considerable archival record, now stored in the University
Archives of NYU's Bobst Library. Every student in the seminar should meet with
me as soon as possible, ready to articulate a clear historical issue and
ideally some repository or body of research material. It may well be that some
of your issues would be well served by exploiting projects that were begun by
earlier Public History projects, ("How Wide is Henry Street" [1993] "Lower
East Sides: Histories and Communities" [1995] as well as ("From Mott to
Mulberry.[1991]), thereby capitalizing on substantive work which still has
many facets to unravel.

Students who have not yet formulated a clear research issue should begin
immediately with relevant topics of urban culture: places of cultural
exchange, ethnic confrontation, patterns of mobility, uses of residential
space, translocal networks, government reform interventions, and in general,
how all of these facets impact the routines of everyday life and lead to
alterations in identity construction, particularly those connected to race,
class and gender.

There are three principle agendas to the Introductory course: 1) an
introduction to Public History issues; 2) a crash course in relevant secondary
literature on late 19th century and 20th century ethnic and racial cultures of
the two New York City neighborhoods under study; and 3) the shaping of
original research on these topics. At times class discussion will be focussed,
and at times they will be rangy. _But emphatically every student must complete
the reading assignments, participate in class discussion and, of course, be
present at every class meeting._

In addition to the required reading assignments, all students are expected to
produce by the last class meeting an original historiographical essay. That
essay should lay out the central themes of a particular historical discourse,
noting especially the important unanswered questions. Students should thus set
the context for the related work of the next semester in which you construct a
Public History project informed by the first semester's work. At several
crucial stages in both semesters every student will receive both a preliminary
and final critique from myself and other relevant faculty experts and Public
History veterans. In the wake of that criticism we expect each student to
rewrite to the criticism and present that revised version at the beginning of
Public History Seminar II in Spring 1999. That research/ historiographical
study will serve the whole class as the basis for team grouping and the public
projects (ideally collaborative) produced for an all-day Workshop at the end
of Spring semester, 1999.

In addition to the reading and research/histoiographical assignments, each
student will produce a research scenario of your paper topic for class
presentation during the 5th and 6th weeks of class. Every student will also
prepare a **looseleaf journal of visuals,** that is, potentially relevant
images that may or may not ultimately be a part of your research essay. These
visuals will represent not only the accumulation of material from your own
research but also preliminary thinking about the use of such non-print
material as historical evidence. Some of these images **must** become
essential parts of your scenario but not as mere illustrations of your text.
Hence meeting with me immediately after the first class begins work on a
preliminary topic and select references which will focus your research.
Students need to submit their journals to me in **mid-October.** On the basis
of the journal context a mini-assignment - sequenced visuals and narrative for
a 30-second TV spot - will be due **the first week of November.**

A newly generated Bibliography of journal scholarship has been developed for
this course and is available on Reserve in the History Dept's Warren Dean Room
(7th Flr, KJCC). Many of the required readings -- particularly those listed as
"On Reserve" -- will be xeroxed and available in the Graduate Student Reading
area aka Warren Dean Room. All other readings have been ordered -- in
paperback where possible -- and should be purchased at the New York University
Bookstore. Where available, the required texts also can be found in the Bobst
Library Reserve Room.

**CLASS SCHEDULE**

SESSION I - THE NEW YORK CITY LOCUS

**Films** : "New York As It Was" plus "The Big Apple" (the official
introductory video of the Museum of the City of New York

**Required Reading:**

Burguiere, Andre, "The Fate of the History of Mentalites in the Annales,"
_Comparative Studies in Society and History_ , 24 (1982)

Conzen, Kathleen, "Quantification and the New Urban History," _Journal of
Interdisciplinary History_ 13 (Spring 1983): 653-77

Frisch, Michael, "American Urban History as an Example of Recent
Historiography," _History and Theory_ 18 (1979): 350-77.

Hershberg, Theodore, ""The New Urban History: Toward an Interdisciplinary
History," _Journal of Urban History_ 5 (1978): 3-40.

Eric Lampard, "Historical Contours of Contemporary Urban Society," _Journal of
Contemporary History_ v. 4 (1969): 3-25.

_____________, "The Urbanizing World," in H Dyos and Michael Wolff (eds) _The
Victorian City: Images and Realities_ (1973)  
    


**Suggested Reading:  **  
    


Calhoun, C. J. "History, Anthropology and the Study of Communities: Some
Problems with Macfarlane's Proposal," _Social History_ v. 3, no 3 (1978):
363-73.

Conzen, Kathleen N., "Immigrants, Immigrant Neighborhoods and Ethnic Identity:
Historical Issues," _Journal of American History_ 66, no 3 (1979):603-15.

Keller, Suzanne, _The Urban Neighborhood_ (1968) HT151.K38

Gordon, Milton, _Assimilation in American Life_

Hammack, David, _Power and Society: Greater New York City at the Turn of the
Century_

Rutman, Darrett, "Community Study," _Historical Methods_ , 13 (Winter 1980),
30 ff. HN1. S56

Ware, Caroline, _Greenwich Village, 1920-1930_ (1963)  
    


SESSION 2 SOCIAL ACTIVISM AND DOCUMENTARY MEDIA

[Screening: _Daughters of the Troubles: Belfast Stories_

by Marcia Rock]

**Required Reading:  **

Robert Rosenstone, ****_Visions of the Past_ , Parts 1 & 3

Michael Frisch, "The Memory of History," in _Presenting the Past_

Vivian Sobchak, "The Insistent Fringe: Moving Images and the Historical
Consiousness," _History and Theory_ , v 36, no 4 (Dec 1997): 4- 20.

**Suggested Reading:**

Abrash, Barbara and Sternberg, Janet (eds) _Historians and Filmmakers: Toward
Collaboration_ [On Reserve]

Benson, Susan Porter et al (eds) _Presenting the Past_ Chaps on films.  

Egan, Kathleen and Barbara Abrash, _Mediating History_ Rosenstone, Robert,
_Revisioning History_ (1995)

PN1995.2/ R48

Sobchak, Vivian (ed) _Persistance of History: Cinema, TV and Modern Events_
(1995) PN1995.2/ P47  

Sontag, Susan. _On Photography_  
    


SESSION 3 - CONCEPTUALIZING THE CITY

**Required Reading:**

Dolores Hayden, _The Power of Place: Urban Landscapes as Public History_
[1995] (rev by Carl Abbott, "Los Angeles Revisualized," _Reviews in American
History_ 25 (1997): 332-36)

Marcus, Stephen, "Reading the Illegible City" in _The Victorian City_ , v. I -

**Suggested Reading:**

Bender, Thomas, _Community and Social Change in America_

Boyer, Christine, _City of Collective Memory_

Blackmar, Elizabeth and Roy Rosenzweig, _The Park and the People_ (1992)

Grady Clay, _Close Up: How to Read the American City_

Ford, Larry, _Cities and Buildings_

Macfarlane, Alan, "History, Anthropology, and the Study of Communities,"
_Social History_ 2 (May 1977): 631-52.  

Sharpe, Wm and Wollock, Leonard, (eds) _Visions of the Modern City: Essays in
History, Art and Literature_ (1983) esp "From 'Great Town' to 'Nonplace Urban
Realm': Reading the Modern City," 1-50 [HT 155/.V57]

Taylor, William R. (ed) _Inventing Times Square_

Von Hoffman, Alexander, _Local Attachments:The Making of an Urban
Neighborhood, 1850 to 1920_ (1995)  

Ward, David and Oliver Zunz (eds) _The Landscape of Modernity_

Wang, Peter (ed) _The Mortal City_  
    


SESSION 4 - THE URBAN SHAPES OF RACE AND ETHNICITY

**Required Reading:**

Ira Katznelson, _City Trenches: Urban Politics and the Patterning of Class in
the United States_ (1981)

**Suggested Reading:**

Bayor, Ronald H., _Neighbors in Conflict: The Irish,  Germans and Italians of
New York City, 1929-1941_ (1978)

Borchert, James, _Alley Life in Washington_

Katznelson, Ira and Weir, Margaret, _Schooling for All: Class, Race and the
Decline of the Democratic ideal_ (1985)

Goodenow, Ronald K and Diane Ravitch (eds) _Educating an Urban People: The New
York City Experience_ (1981)

Maffi, Mario. _Gateway to the Promised Land: Ethnic Cultures on the Lower East
Side_ (1995)

Richin, Moses, "The Lower East Side" in

_The Promised City_ (1977)

Smith, Neil, "New City, New Frontier: The Lower East Side as Wild, Wild West,"
in Michael Sorkin (ed) R. Sorkin (ed), _Variations on a Theme Park: The New
American City and the End of Public Space_ (1992)

Ward, David, _Cities and Immigrants: A Geography of Change in Nineteenth
Century America_ (1971)

Weiss, Bernard (ed) _American Education and the European Immigrant, 1840-1940_
(1982)

SESSION 5-6 presentation of scenarios

(Each person will be responsible for a 1-2 page **written** critique of each
scenario, with copies to both author and myself)  
    


SESSION 7 - RECONFIGURING ETHNIC AND RACIAL CULTURE

**Required Reading:**

**Michael Katz (ed)** _The Underclass Debate_ Intro and Chaps 2,3,5  & 6\.

**Suggested Reading:**

Abu-Lughod, Janet (ed) _From Urban Village to East Village: The Battle for New
York's Lower East Side_ (1994)

Kwong, Peter, _The New Chinatown_

Orsi, Robert, _The Madonna of 115th Street_

Osofsky, Gilbert, _Harlem: The Making of a Ghetto, Negro New York, 1890-1930_
(1963)

Reimers, David, _Still the Golden Door: The Third World Comes to America_
(1985)

______________, "Immigration" _Encyclopedia of American Social History_ , v. 1

Sanchez-Korrol, Virginia, _From Colonia to Community: The History of Puerto
Ricans in New York City, 1917-1948_ (1983)

Stansell, Christine, "Women in the Neighborhoods," from

_City of Women_ , Ch. 3 (1982)

Sutton, Constance and Chaney, Elsa, _Caribbean Life in New York City:
Sociocultural Dimensions_ (1987)

Takaki, Ronald, _Strangers From a Different Shore_ (1989)  
    


**[Hand in "Image Journals" - be sure to include actual images, details of
provenance and potential questions or lines of** **interpretation, ie
demonstrate an engagement with image as historical event.]**

SESSION 8 - INTERPRETING MATERIAL CULTURE

**Required Reading:**

Mike Wallace, _Mickey Mouse History and Other_

_Essays on American Memory_

[On Reserve: _Invisible America_ ]

**Suggested Reading:**

Bodnar, John. _Remaking America: Public Memory, Commemoration and Patriotism
in the 29th Century_ (1992)

Doss, Erika, "The Art of Cultural Politics: From Regionalism to Abstract
Expressionism," in Lary May (ed) _Recasting America: Culture and Politics in
the Age of the Cold War_ (1989)

Glassberg, David. "Public History and the Study of Memory," _The Public
Historian_ v. 18, no 2 (Spring 1996): 7-23.

Leone, Mark and Silberman, Neil (eds), _Invisible America_ (1996)

Lubar, Steven and W. David Kingery (eds), _History From Things: Essays on
Material Culture_ (1993)

Rabinowtiz, Richard, "Story Time, Exhibit Time," _Culturefront_ (Summer 1997):
57-65, 72, 95.

Michael Rogin, "The Sword Becomes a Flashing Vision: D. W. Griffiths' _Birth
of a Nation_ ," in _Ronald Reagan The Movie_ Chap. 7.

Schlereth, Thomas, "Mirror of the Past: Historical Photography and American
History," in _Artifacts and the American Past_ (1980)

Stave, Bruce, "A Conversation with Rick Beard," _Journal of Urban History_ v
23, no 5 (July 1997):601-22.

Alan Tractenberg, _Reading American Photographs_

SESSION 9 - THE HISTORIOGRAPHY OF SOCIAL CLASS

**Required Reading:**

Katz's _The Underclass Debate_

CHaps. 7, 9, 10, 11, Conclusion

**Suggested Reading:**

Story, Ronald, "Social Class," _Encyclopedia of American Social History_

Sutcliffe, Anthony and Derek Fraser (eds) _Cities, Class and Communities_
CB425.C55 (1990).  

**Writing Assignment Due: 30-second script which focuses on your research
project: two columns, one with images (actual or described), one with actual
narration.**  
    


SESSION 10 - [Research Time and Individual Consultation]

Session 11-14 - Draft Presentations

(Each person will be responsible for 1-2 page **written** critiques of their
fellow-students' drafts, with copies to both author and myself)  
    
    
    


  
---|---

