**DEPARTMENT OF PSYCHOLOGY**

**January, 2002**

**_GRADUATE COURSES_**

**Spring, 2002**

**_Department Permit REQUIRED for ALL Graduate Courses_**

**PROSEMINARS**

**_Proseminars are all 1 c.u. unless otherwise specified_** **COURSE** |
**TITLE** |  **INSTRUCTOR** |  **TIME** |  **ROOM**  
---|---|---|---|---  
|  |  |  |  
Psyc 600-301* |  Individual Differences | Norman | MW 1-3 | PsyL D1  
Psyc 600-302 | Human Information Processing | Sternberg | WF 10-12 | PsyL C41  
Psyc 600-303* | Hearing | Richards | MW 1-3 | PsyL B50  
Psyc 609-401 | Systems & Integrative Neuroscience | Coulter/Crawford | MWF
9-11 | Morg 140  
Psyc 630-401 | Cognitive Neuroscience of Memory | Thompson-Schill | TR
10:30-12:30 | Eisx 200  
**_*.50 c.u._**

**Psyc 600-301* Individual Differences meets _January 7 through February 20,
2002_**  
**Psyc 600-303* Hearing meets _February 25 through April 17, 2002_**

**SEMINARS** **COURSE** |  **TITLE** |  **INSTRUCTOR** |  **TIME** |  **ROOM**  
---|---|---|---|---  
Psyc 612-401 | Statistics | Rosenbaum | TR 12-1:30 | SHDH 105  
|  |  |  |  
Psyc 709-301 | S/T Clinical | Seligman | Arranged | Arranged  
Psyc 709-302 | S/T Clinical | Barber | R 3-6 | **  
Psyc 727-301 | Electronics for Scientists | Andrews-Labenski | TR 9-10:30 |
PsyL A16  
Psyc 733-301 | S/T Vision | Brainard | T 3-5 | Arranged  
Psyc 745-301 | S/T Cognitive Neuroscience | Farah | Arranged | Arranged  
Psyc 750-401 | Neuropsychopharmacology | Lucki | TR 3-4:15 | TBA  
Psyc 751-301 | S/T Cognitive | H.Gleitman/L.Gleitman/Trueswell | Arranged |
Arranged  
Psyc 774-401 | Attitudes & Behav. Prediction | Fishbein | M 3-5 | Anns 319  
Psyc 811-301 | Psychodiag. Interviewing | Hunt | Arranged | Arranged  
Psyc 815-301 | Introductory Practicum | Hunt | Arranged | Arranged  
Psyc 820-301 | Advanced Practicum | DeRubeis | Arranged | Arranged  
Psyc 820-302 | Advanced Practicum | Hunt | Arranged | Arranged  
|  |  |  |  
  
**_**6th Floor Conference Room, 3535 Market St._**

**_ROOMS ARE SUBJECT TO CHANGE_**  

* * *

**GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS**

**_Spring, 2002_**

**_PROSEMINARS_**

**_Proseminars are 1 c.u. unless otherwise indicated_**

  
**Psyc 600-301*** |  **Individual Differences** |

**M.Frank Norman**  
  
---|---|---  
  
**Individual Differences meets _January 7 through February 20, 2002_**

**_*.50 c.u.   _** The central topic is Behavioral Genetics (additive and
nonadditive components of heritability, common and unique environment, twin
and adoption studies, with applications to IQ, personality, and
psychopathology). The following methodologies are introduced in this context:
latent variable modeling, path diagrams, and the LISREL computer program.
There is also a brief introduction to Evolutionary Psychology, emphasizing how
it complements Behavioral Genetics. Secondary topics are Exploratory Factor
Analysis (via LISREL, and applied to intelligence and personality) and
Psychometric Theory (including validity,  incremental validity, reliability,
and Cronbach's alpha).  **_(Fulfills the "Individual and Group"
requirement)_**  
  **Psyc  600-302** |  **Human Information Processing** |

**Saul Sternberg**  
  
---|---|---  
  
Analysis of mental processes in adult humans:  Attention, Pattern Recognition,
Memory, Timing, Action Sequences.  Introduction to major theoretical issues,
phenomena, experimental methods, analytic tools, and models.  Emphasis on
laboratory methods and on inferences from data to mechanism.  Students repeat
classic experiments in a computer-run lab.  **_(Fulfills the "Mind"
requirement)_** For the syllabus used when this proseminar was last taught,
see **_www.psych.upenn.edu/~saul/prosem.html._**  
  **Psyc 600-303*** |  **Hearing** |

**Virginia Richards**  
  
---|---|---  
  
**Hearing meets _February 25 through April 17, 2002_**

**_*.50 c.u._**   Fundamentals of auditory perception, including loudness,
pitch perception, spatial hearing, will be the primary topics discussed.
Psychophysical approaches to the study of auditory perception will be
emphasized.  ( ** _Fullfills the "Mind" requirement)_**  
  **Psyc  609-401** |  **Systems and Integrative Neuroscience** |

**Doug Coulter/Jud Crawford**  
  
---|---|---  
| **_Cross-listed with INSC 573_**  
---|---  
  
This course provides an introduction to what is known about how neuronal
circuits solve problems for the organism and to current research approaches to
this question. Topics include: vision, audition, olfaction, motor systems,
plasticity, and oscillations. In addition, the course aims to provide an
overview of the structure of the central nervous system. A number of
fundamental concepts are also discussed across topics, such as: lateral
inhibition, integration, filtering, frames of reference, error signals,
adaptation. The course format consists of lectures, discussions, readings of
primary literature, supplemented by textbook chapters and review articles.
**_(Fulfills the "Brain" requirement)_**  
  **Psyc  630-401** |  **Cognitive Neuroscience of Memory** |

**Sharon Thompson-Schill**  
  
---|---|---  
| **_Cross-listed with INSC 630_**  
---|---  
  
This course will review the neural mechanisms of learning and memory. Readings
will include both seminal and cutting-edge papers on topics ranging from
perceptual memory to higher order functions, including working memory,
declarative memory, skill learning, and semantic memory. Within each topic we
will attempt to integrate the results of different neuroscience approaches,
including the study of human neurological patients, lesion studies and single
unit recordings in animals, neural network modeling, event-related potentials,
and functional imaging techniques.  **_(Fulfills the "Brain" requirement)_**  

* * *

**SEMINARS** **Psyc  612-401** |  **Statistics** |

**Paul Rosenbaum**  
  
---|---|---  
| **_Cross-listed with STAT 500_**  
---|---  
  
Covers two unrelated topics: loglinear and logit models for discrete data and
nonparametric methods for nonnormal data. Emphasis is on practical methods of
data analysis and their interpretation. Primarily for doctoral students in the
managerial, behavioral, social and health sciences. May be taken before Stat
500 with permission of instructor.  
  **Psyc  709-301** |  **S/T Clinical** |

**Martin Seligman**  
  
---|---|---  
  
Positive emotion, strengths and virtues, positive institutions.  
  **Psyc  709-302** |  **S/T Clinical** |

**Jacques Barber**  
  
---|---|---  
  
**_Systems of psychotherapy_**.   In this seminar, we will review the major
systems of psychotherapy, emphasizing the theoretical fundations of these
systems, their empirical and clinical evidence, and how they can be applied to
understand and treat complex patients.  Each participant will study in depth a
different system of psychotherapy and will prepare a presentation and a report
for the class.  
  **Psyc  727-301** |  **Electronics for Scientists** |

**John Andrews-Labenski**  
  
---|---|---  
  
An introductory theory and practicum course covering the essential principles
and applications of electronics.  Emphasis is on understanding basic
electricity, measurements, instrumentation, circuit simulation, data
acquisition, and computer control systems used in research environments
(<http://www.psych.upenn.edu/shop/psyc727>)  
  **Psyc  733-301** |  **S/T Vision** |

**David Brainard**  
  
---|---|---  
  
**_Vision Science.   _**An introduction to vision science with coverage of
both sensation (how information about the environment is transduced by the
visual system) and perception (how the visual system processes the information
to provide a stable and useful visual representation.)   In addition to
content coverage, the course will emphasize quantitative measurement/analysis
techniques and the link between brain and behavior.  
  **Psyc  745-301** |  **S/T Cognitive Neuroscience** |

**Martha Farah**  
  
---|---|---  
  
A weekly research seminar at which students discuss their work in cognitive
neuroscience.  Emphasis will be on the discussion of work in the planning
stage and "in progress," but we will also provide a forum to practice formal
research presentations.  
  **Psyc  750-401** |  **S/T Neuropsychopharmacology** |

**Irwin Lucki**  
  
---|---|---  
| **_Cross-listed with PHAR 550_**  
---|---  
  
Biological issues relevant to neuropsychiatric illnesses are covered in detail
in four sections.  The first section covers clinical aspects of major
psychiatric disorders and includes some contact with patients.  The second
section presents the neuroanatomy of the limbic system.  In the third section,
emphasis is on the mechanisms of action of psychotropic drugs, including
antidepressants, antipsychotics, anxiolytics, and stimulants.  The final
section covers information relevant to understanding biological processes that
may be abnormal in neuropsychiatric illnesses, such as stress, sleep, and
circadian rhythms, as well as quantitative genetics.  
  **Psyc  751-301** |  **S/T Cognitive** |

**Henry Gleitman/Lila Gleitman/John Trueswell**  
  
---|---|---  
  
This is a research seminar in cognitive psychology offered by Henry and Lila
Gleitman.  The seminar meets every Wednesday evening at the Gleitmans.  To
assure intellectual continuity, participation has to be on a one-year basis.
Participation (whether by registration or auditing) is by permission of the
instructors.  If interested, get in touch with either Henry or Lila Gleitman
via e-mail.  
  **Psyc  774-401** |  **Attitudes & Behavioral Prediction** |

**Martin Fishbein**  
  
---|---|---  
| **_Cross-listed COMM 577_**  
---|---  
  
An introduction to the concept of attitude and its role in behavioral
prediction.  The course will cover standardized attitude measurement
instruments (e.g., GThurstone, Likert, Guttman and Semantic Differential
Scales), expectancy-value models, and psychological or individual level
theories of behavioral prediction and change (e.g., Health Belief Model,
Theory of Reasoned Action, Theory of Planned Behavior, Social Cognitive
Theory, Theory of Interpersonal Relations and Subjective Culture, and the
Transtheoretical Stage of Change Model).  Emphasis will be placed upon how an
understanding of theory and measurement is necessary for developing effective
behavior change interventions.  
  **Psyc  811-301** |  **Psychodiagnostic Interviewing** |

**Melissa Hunt**  
  
---|---|---  
**Psyc  815-301** |  **Introductory Practicum** |

**Melissa Hunt**  
  
---|---|---  
**Psyc  820-301** |  **Advanced Practicum** |

**Rob DeRubeis**  
  
---|---|---  
**Psyc  820-302** |  **Advanced Practicum** |

**Melissa Hunt**  
  
---|---|---

