**![](Images/prmtitle.gif)  
LINKS**  
TO SITES RELEVANT TO  
PSYCHOLOGICAL RESEARCH METHODS  
---  
  
[John Davis, Ph.D.](mailto:davisj@mscd.edu)  
[Department of Psychology](http://clem.mscd.edu/~psych/)  
[The Metropolitan State College of Denver](http://www.mscd.edu/)  
  
_Updated January 22, 1999_  
  
INTRODUCTION  
---  
  
This page provides links to web sites relevant to students studying
psychological research methods. This list is not nearly complete, but several
of the sites to which you can link from here are extraordinary in their
coverage. I intend this page to be a starting point from which you can access
a wide range of useful resources.

I have attempted to group these sites by focus. However, there is a lot of
overlap.  
  
DISCLAIMER: As always, you will need to be the judge of the information you
find.  
  
|

  * **Sites related to research methods**
  * **Access to lists of psychology resources**
  * **Help with APA style**
  * **Sites for organizations**
  * **Other useful sites** 
  
---  
  
* * *

* * *

**SITES RELATED TO RESEARCH METHODS**  
---  
  
**<http://clem.mscd.edu/~davisj/prm2/outlines.html>**  
**Outlines and Descriptions of Psychological Research Methods**. By John Davis
(me). These outlines cover the content of my undergraduate psychological
research methods courses. A couple of on-line articles are included, too.

  
  
**[http://trochim.human.cornell.edu/index.htm](http://trochim.human.cornell.edu/index.html)  
Bill Trochim's Center for Social Research Methods**. A well-done and thorough
site for graduate-level social research methods. This site includes an on-line
textbook in social research methods and a good list of research-related
resources on the Web.

  
  
**<http://trochim.human.cornell.edu/kb/kbhome.htm>  
The Knowledge Base: An On-line Research Methods Textbook. **By Bill Trochim.
Thorough and readable. A good resource for many aspects of psychological
research methods.

  
  
**<http://www.uakron.edu/edfound/people/Kushner/Techniques/index.html> **
**Techniques of Research**. A Web site developed for a course in educational
research methods.

  
  
**<http://www.psychologie.uni-bonn.de/allgm/links.htm>** **WWW Sites for
Experimental Psychology**. Many resources from basic to advanced.

  
  
**<http://clem.mscd.edu/~psych/research/rm.htm>** **Research Methods I
Homepage** by Spencer Morrison, Ph.D. Includes an overview of APA manuscript
format and a guide to SPSS.

  
  
**<http://trochim.human.cornell.edu/tutorial/TUTORIAL.HTM>** **Research
Methods Tutorials** written by and for students in a Program Evaluation and
Research Design class at Cornell.

  
  
**[http://bolt.lakeheadu.ca/~facedwww/Kerlin/qualresearch/quant.corner.html](http://bolt.lakeheadu.ca/~facedwww/Kerlin/qualresearch/qualPage.html)**
**The Quantitative Corner of the Qualitative Research Page.** Includes links
for quantitative research.

  
  
**<http://www.ualberta.ca/~jrnorris/qual.html> QualPage: **Resources for
qualitative researchers.

  
  
**<http://bolt.lakeheadu.ca/~facedwww/Kerlin/qualresearch/qualPage.html>**
**The Qualitative Research Page.** Includes a fine list of links for
qualitative research.

  
  
**<http://www.auckland.ac.nz/msis/isworld/index.html>**  
**Qualitative Research in Information Systems.** A thorough site for
qualitative research. Good definitions of terms and strategies.

  
  
**[http://lemoyne.edu/~hevern/narpsych.html](http://lemoyne.edu/~hevern/narpsych/html%20)
Narrative Psychology: An Internet Guide.** Nice site on this aspect of
qualitative research.

  
  
**<http://www.wp.com/stat/research.html>  
How to Do Research (Advice) **by Paul Hutchinson at Macquarie University **.**
Many helpful hints for beginning researchers. I recommend this site.

  
  
* * *

**LISTS OF PSYCHOLOGY RESOURCES  
** The sites in this section are primarily or exclusively links. Most of the
sites above also include links to other resources.  
  
**[http://www.psychwww.com/](http://www.psychwww.com) Psych Web by Russ Dewey
at Georgia Southern University**. This is a high-quality mega-list of links,
well-organized and easy to use. Many sites are useful to undergraduate
psychology students, including sites on career development, APA style, web
resources, etc.

  
  
**<http://trochim.human.cornell.edu/pointers/pointers.htm>  
Research Pointers Page. **By Bill Trochim. Many good resources for research
methods.

  
  
**<http://lemoyne.edu/~hevern/psychref.html> Resources in Psychology on the
Internet. **Big, well-put-together site. Many, many resources. Recommended.

  
  
**<http://www.psychologicalscience.org/links.htm>** **American Psychological
Society's** list of links to internet sites related to scientific psychology.

  
  
**<http://www.cmhc.com/webpsych/>** **WebPsych.** More oriented to
psychological self-help and mental health, but some links from this site may
be useful to researchers.

  
  
**<http://clem.mscd.edu/~psych/links.htm> Links to other psychology-related
sites ** from the MSCD Psychology Department home page.

  
  
**<http://www.yahoo.com/Science/Psychology/>** **Yahoo Psychology links.**

  
  
**These sites offer guidelines for evaluating the quality of information
available on the WWW.**

**<http://milton.mse.jhu.edu:8001/research/education/net.html> Evaluating
information found on the Internet.  
<http://trochim.human.cornell.edu/webeval/webeval.htm>** **Evaluating
Websites**.  
**<http://urisref.library.cornell.edu/skill26.htm>** **How to critically
evaluate information sources**  

  
  
* * *

**HELP WITH APA STYLE AND PRESENTATIONS**  
  
**<http://www.psychwww.com/resource/apacrib.htm> APA Style Resources on Psych
Web page by Russ Dewey**. A listing of links relevant to using APA style. Many
of these links are given below, but it is worth checking this site.

  
  
**<http://clem.mscd.edu/~psych/research/apastyle.htm>  
APA Manuscript Style for a Research Paper. **From Dr. Spencer Morrison's
Research I site. This is a good overview of most of what you need to know for
an undergraduate research paper (such as a paper for PRM2). There are a few
minor errors that need to be corrected but nothing major. (For example, it
says that block quotes should be single spaced; they should be double spaced
like the rest of the manuscript.)

  
  
**<http://www.ldl.net/~bill/aparev.htm>  
** A good description of APA style formatted in APA style.

  
  
**<http://www.uwm.edu/people/pcsmith/usergide.htm>  
Hypertext Research Paper. **A sample research paper written in APA style with
comments and references to the APA Publication Manual. Useful for learning APA
style.

  
  
**<http://www.apa.org/journals/faq.html>  
APA Publication Manual Frequently Asked Questions**. Clarifies a few points
from the APA's 4th edition of their Publication Manual.

  
  
**<http://www.psychwww.com/tipsheet/labrep.htm>  
Preparing your lab report. **Guidelines for preparing laboratory reports for
Jan Kennedy's course at Georgia Southern University. Some of it is specific to
that course, but most of the site is general.

  
  
**<http://155.43.225.30/apa/apa_index.htm>  
A Guide to Writing Research Papers using APA Style** in a question-and-answer
format.

  
  
**<http://www.beadsland.com/weapas>** **Web Extension to APA Style**.
Suggestions for citing URLs in psychological research papers.

  
  
**<http://www.utmem.edu/personal/crussell/poster_table>**  
**Developing and presenting qualitative research posters.** The information
here is relevant to quantitative posters, too.

  
  
**

* * *

SITES FOR RELEVANT ORGANIZATIONS**  
  
**<http://www.apa.org/science/>** **APA's Science site**.

  
  
**<http://www.psychologicalscience.org/> American Psychological Society.**

  
  
* * *

**OTHER USEFUL SITES**

  
  
**If you have suggestions for other useful Internet sites or if any of these
addresses are out of date, please let me know
at[davisj@mscd.edu](mailto:davisj@mscd.edu).**  
  
* * *

[![](Images/sphere1.gif)](outlines.html) |

**[OUTLINES AND DESCRIPTIONS](outlines.html)** OF PSYCH RESEARCH METHODS |

[![](Images/sphere1.gif)](syllabus.html) |

**[COURSE SYLLABUS](syllabus.html)** FOR PSYCHOLOGICAL RESEARCH METHODS II  
---|---|---|---  
  
![](Images/top.gif) |

[![](Images/email.gif)](mailto:davisj@mscd.edu) |

[![](Images/prm2.gif)](Welcome.html)  
---|---|---  
  
[![](Images/JDhome.gif)](http://clem.mscd.edu/~davisj/Welcome.html) |

[![](Images/psydept.gif)](http://clem.mscd.edu/~psych/) |

[![](Images/mscd.gif)](http://www.mscd.edu)  
---|---|---  
TOP ]|[Psych Research Methods Home Page](Welcome.html)|[PRM2 Course
Syllabus](syllabus.html)|[John Davis's Home
Page](http://clem.mscd.edu/~davisj/Welcome.html)|[Email John
Davis](mailto:davisj@mscd.edu)|[MSCD Psych
Dept](http://clem.mscd.edu/~psych)|[The Metropolitan State College of
Denver](http://www.mscd.edu/)

