**Psychology Internship Fall 2001**

Schedule Code: 06280, Course #: Psy 499

NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNN

* **Dr. Lorna Catford phone: 664-2402**

**Office: Stevenson 3083 fax: 664-3113**

**Office hours: By Appointment e-mail: lorna.catford@sonoma.edu**

NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNN

**_General Information_**

  * The focus of your work will be the time you spend in a community agency or similar setting, applying what you've learned in the classroom in a "real life" situation.
  * **You may receive one unit of credit for each 45 hours worked during the semester**. On average that is three hours per week for fifteen weeks. You may enroll for up to 8 units.
  * **_Please note that Psych. 499 is offered for CR/NC only. You _cannot_ take it for a grade._**

*  

**_To Apply and Register_**

  * Fill out an **_Internship Application_** (in rack by Psych. office) Return to Lorna Catford (Stev 3083).
  * Obtain an **approved placement** (paid or unpaid) which has a field supervisor. If your Internship is your regular job, you must select _new skills_ to develop so there is an element of learning to it.
  * You may do this **on your own** ; or from information (a) on the **Internship Bulletin Board** (next to Stevenson 3083); (b) in the **Internship Information File** in the Psychology Office (lower drawer of large file cabinet); or (c) at the **Resource Center** (Village 400), in any _Internship Binder_ (they have internships listed by area, so an education or criminal justice or other one might suit you), or one of the _Job Binders_ ( _Part Time Care-Giver_ , _Binder one: Human & Social Services_, or _Summer Jobs_.
  * Complete an **_Internship Agreement_** form, ( available in Psych. Office or at an Internship Orientation Meeting). At the Orientation Meeting, or by special arrangement, we can help with this.
  * Turn in your Internship Agreement, with the signature of your on-site supervisor, to Lorna Catford, Stev. 3083 (or in her Psych. Office mail box).
  * We will get the Department Chair's and the Dean's signatures for you and send your Internship Agreement to Admissions & Records to register you. (Aren't we kind?) You don't have to do anything, except check that it's on your schedule during drop-add period. **You _cannot add it by phone_.**
  * **If you have not yet lined up your internship, see Lorna Catford as soon as possible.** Students unable to obtain placements by the end of the add-drop period will be terminated from the internship program for this semester. You may NOT petition for a late add.

*  

**_Recommended Text_**

_The Successful Internship: Transformation and Empowerment_ , H. Frederick
Sweitzer & Mary A. King, Brooks/Cole, 1998.

  * This is an excellent and perceptive resource with tips for totally succeeding in any new job in the human services field.

**_Class Meetings_ (4 Required)**

You must attend **FOUR** meetings: **_one_ Orientation Meeting before or
during the first 2 weeks of class** (come to the EARLIEST one you can!),
followed by **_three_ Supervision Meetings**. You may attend _any_ of the
Orientations, but please choose _either_ a Monday _or_ a Wednesday meeting
time for your Supervision meetings. If you should miss a Supervision meeting,
you _MUST_ attend the **Make-Up Meeting** to receive credit for the class!!!

**Orientation Meetings** ( _attend ONE_ ) **:**

  * Mon Aug 28, 9-10:30 a.m., Stevenson 3050
  * Wed Sep 6, 12.30-2 p.m., Stevenson 3050

_Select one of the following Supervision Series_ ** _:_**

**A. Monday Morning Supervision Meetings:**

  * Mon Oct 2, 9-10:30 a.m., Stev 3050
  * Mon Oct 30, 9-10:30 a.m., Stev 3050
  * Mon Nov 27, 9-10:30 a.m., Stev 3050

**B. Monday Afternoon Supervision Meetings:**

  * Mon Oct 2, 4-5:30 p.m., Stev 3050
  * Mon Oct 30, 4-5:30 p.m., Stev 3050
  * Mon Nov 27, 4-5:30 p.m., Stev 3050

**C. Wednesday Afternoon Supervision Meetings:**

  * Wed Oct 4, 12.30-2 p.m., Stev 3050
  * Wed Nov 1, 12.30-2 p.m., Stev 3050
  * Wed Nov 29, 12.30-2 p.m., Stev 3050

**Make-Up Meeting** (For _any_ missed Supervision Mtg.):

  * Wed Dec 6, 12.30-2 p.m., Stev 3050

**Alternate Make-Up:**

  * Participate in a panel describing your internship placement (with fliers on your agency to distribute) in Psy 295, Community Involvement Project, Monday, Dec 4, 12-1 p.m., Stev 3050



**_Course Requirements_**

* 1\. Apply for and be accepted to Psych. 499. If you are reading this, you have probably already done this.

2\. Obtain an approved placement which has a field supervisor. If your
Internship is your regular job, you must select **new skills** to develop so
there is an element of learning to it.

3\. Complete the _Internship AgreemenT_ , with your and your field
supervisor's signatures, and turn in to Lorna Catford.

4\. Attend on-campus **Orientation (1) and Supervision (3) Meetings** ( _if
you miss one, you MUST attend a Make-Up Meeting_ )

5\. Turn in **Entrance Paper** at the **_Oct 2 / Oct 4_ ** Supervision
Meeting.

6\. Do your **field work** throughout the semester and record your hours on
the **Time Log** that will be provided.

7\. Turn in **Exit Paper** (with **Cover Page** ) **on or before _Dec 6_**. To
this you should attach (1) your **Time Log** signed by your supervisor, plus
(2) an **evaluation from your supervisor on agency letter-head stationery** ,
to verify that you have put in the number of hours required.



**_Entrance Paper_**

**Due at Oct 2 / Oct 4 Supervision Meeting. 1 page, double-spaced, typed.**

1\. _Data_ : (a) Your name, (b) Your placement, (c) Your field supervisor, (d)
Your specific duties.

2\. Please say something about your goals, expectations, and anxieties
regarding your internship placement. What interesting possibilities do you see
that you might open up which are not part of the explicitly stated duties? How
does it connect with your interests and passions? What do you hope to learn
from it?



**_On-Campus Supervision Meetings_**

**Please think about each meeting before you actually show up.**

**You are expected to _share your experiences, challenges_ , etc**., so that
all participants get a glimpse of what a variety of different placements are
like. This can also be of considerable value to you in helping you find
solutions to concerns you may have regarding your placement.

Issues that you might like to discuss may include: ways of working with your
clients, concerns that you are reluctant to talk about with your field
supervisor, or even problems with co-workers or with your supervisor. We try
to find a way to be supportive and helpful in regard to all these kinds of
issues. **You are expected to _participate each week_ , providing feedback and
brainstorming for your class-mates' concerns**. Everything discussed is
**confidential**.



**_Exit Paper_**

**Please turn in this paper on or before Dec 6.** It will be saved in a
resource file of Agency Descriptions which will be available to future
students searching for internships. Please complete (A) and (B) following:

**A. _Cover Sheet (to be provided)_** including:

> >   * Your **name**

>>   * Your **placement** , including specific unit and location.

>>   * Your field **supervisor's** **name**.

>>   * The **population** you work with. (Be as specific as possible -- ex.,
"Level 14 severely emotionally disturbed teenage boys with a history of
violence for whom this is the last stop before jail," or "Foster children who
need greater individual supervision and treatment than is available in the
regular county program.")

>>   * Would you **recommend** this placement to other students in the future?
Why or why not?

>>   * What **qualities** do you think a student needs to be successful in
this position? What kind of person do you think would not like, or have a hard
time in, this position?

>>

**B. _Essay_**

**Please choose Option 1 or Option 2.** Remember this is an informational
document for other students; keep it **concise** while giving a good sense of
the internship.

**_OPTION 1_ :**

1\. Briefly describe what you actually did.

2\. What worked well for you in this placement?

3\. What did not work so well for you.

4\. What are the goals of this agency or organization, or the particular unit
of it in which you participated?

5\. In your estimation, in what ways is the agency effective in meeting its
goals?

6\. In your estimation, in what ways is the agency **not** effective in
meeting its goals? How does it get in its own way?

7\. How effective was your field supervisor as a supervisor **for you?** In
what specific ways was he or she helpful or not so helpful?

**_OPTION 2:_**

If this is your second semester in this same internship and you wrote
essentially the paper described above last semester, you may ignore questions
1-7. Write a **brief personal paper** (not for the open files) summing up your
personal and professional challenges, insights and growth during your
internship. Identify the key learnings you are taking away from this
experience. Do NOT include the cover page.



**_Time Log_**

Make sure your supervisor signs your log of hours worked, and turn it in to
the instructor's box not later than Dec 6.

If you have **not yet completed the number of hours you registered for** , you
may (a) project ahead to the hours you will complete, with permission of your
supervisor, who should add a comment on the Time Log that you will in fact do
the work; or (b) fill out the form for an Incomplete -- when you submit your
complete Time Log and Supervisor Evaluation, the instructor will change your
grade to Credit. Discuss these options with the instructor.



**_Supervisor's Evaluation_**

At the start of your internship, let your supervisor know that you will need a
final evaluation from him or her, written on the agency's **letterhead** paper
(due by Dec 6).

I suggest that you ask for a detailed (and glowing!) "To whom It May Concern"
letter of recommendation that you can also use with your resume when applying
for jobs or graduate school. Keep the original and hand in a copy for this
class.

Alternately, the evaluation may be brief -- a simple statement on agency
letterhead that you fulfilled your obligations.

* * *

LINKS

  * Internship Agencies Database

    [Agencies A-C](AgenciesA-C.html)
    [Agencies D-K](AgenciesD-K.html)
    [Agencies L-Q](AgenciesL-Q.html)
    [Agencies R-T](AgenciesR-T.html)
    [Agencies U-Z](AgenciesU-Z.html)
     

  * [Psychology Home](http://www.sonoma.edu/psychology/)



[

* * *

](http://www.sonoma.edu/psychology/)

[ew](mailto:erica.wilcher@sonoma.edu) 7/20/00

