**History 683**

**Seminar on Historiography**

**Fall 1998**

**[Prof. Robert M. Levine](mailto:rlevine@miami.edu)**

**Office Hours: Ashe 605 Mondays and Wednesdays, 9 to 10:30AM and by
appointment**

**Department of History**

**University of Miami**

**Coral Gables, Florida**

**web home page:**[www.as.miami.edu/las](http://www.as.miami.edu/las)

* * *

**

The University of Miami Honor Code applies to all students enrolled in the
course.**

* * *

**Seminar participants will read in depth a wide range of historical writing
spanning the spectrum from traditional to multi-disciplinary history. Examples
will not be limited to any single region of the world. Emphasis will be given
to ways historians use evidence and frame their questions and their analysis.
In addition to weekly assignments, students will prepare a substantial paper
analyzing the collected work of a single historian or historical school. The
seminar grade will be based on participation and written work during the
semester (60%) and the final paper (40%).**

* * *

**Course requirements:**

![trainstat.gif \(15578 bytes\)](../images/gif/trainstat.gif)

  * **Written work as assigned**
  * **Participation**
  * **Seminar paper [10-25 pages, due on final day of examination period]**

**Attendance is required at all seminar meetings. No extension or grade of
"Incomplete" will be given unless the student provides a physicians's letter
attesting to incapacity. There will be no exceptions.**

* * *

**Required Reading: (all paperbacks)**

![tajhead.gif \(8825 bytes\)](../images/gif/tajhead.gif)

  * **Peter Burke, ed., _New Perspectives on Historical Writing_ (Penn State University Press, 1992) **
  * **Carl E. Schorske, _Thinking With History_ (Princeton University Press, 1998) **
  * **Robert M. Levine, _Images of History_ (Duke University Press, 1992)**

**Highly Recommended:**

  * **Diana Hacker, _A Pocket Style Manual,_ 2nd ed. (Bedford Books, 1997)**

* * *

**Week 1: Introduction**

![tents.gif \(14936 bytes\)](../images/gif/tents.gif)

**Focus: What is the relationship between the historian and the past? What
does it mean that we take upon ourselves the responsibility of analyzing and
narrating the lives of other people, whether famous or not? Are historians
advocates or objective chroniclers? What sorts of responsibilities do we have
to our subjects or do we have any at all? How does the historical profession
work? What are some of its unwritten rules?**

**From hypothesis to monograph: the path of historical research and writing
journals publishing professional associations and memberships networking
popular history vs. professional history narrative history vs. analytic
history methodologies**

* * *

**

Week 2: Reviews and differences of opinion**

**Select a monograph in your field published between 1988 and 1995. Look for
one that you think breaks new ground, perhaps stirring up controversy. Look
for one that you think breaks new ground, stirring up historical controversy.
(Ask faculty in the department for suggestions for your field). Read it, and
also find at least four published reviews from a range of scholarly journals.
Write a short essay (750-1,000 words) discussing the book's reception from the
standpoint of the reviews. Concentrate on the debate among scholars about the
book; do not summarize the book's contents except very briefly.**

**Journals to be consulted may include: _Annals of Scholarship, Past and
Present, Slavery and Abolition, Times Literary Supplement_ (TLS); _New York
Review of Books, Comparative Studies in Society and History, American
Historical Review, Luso-Brazilian Review, Journal of Latin American Colonial
History, Hispanic American Historical Review, Journal of Latin American
Studies, Journal of American History, Critical Issues, The History Teacher,
Radical History Review, Journal of Peasant Studies, Latin American Research
Review, Journal of Contemporary History, Journal of Interdisciplinary History,
Crosscultural Studies, Signs, Journal of Social History, Tikkun, Florida
Historical Quarterly_ (and dozens of state and regional historical society
journals), I _nternational Labor and Working-Class History, The Historian_ ,
and a host of others, including journals published abroad and in other
languages as well as on-line reviews (especially H-Net).**

![lbrcoverSM.gif \(18063 bytes\)](../images/jpg/lbrcoverSM.gif)

* * *

**

Week 3: Marxism, Class Structure, and the French Revolution **

**Read Sharpe, "History from Below;" Alfred Cobban, "The Revolt of the
Privileged Classes," _A Short History of Modern France,_ I, 112-184; Simon
Schama, _Citizens_ , 851-875. **

**Be prepared to discuss the three different positions represented here:
Marxist, British Conservative, "New Wave/Continuity School" What are the main
analytical and methodological bases of each historical school?**

  * **What are the principal concerns of each school?**
  * **Does class struggle exist?**
  * **How does the middle class fit into the Marxist notion of a society divided between proletarians and bourgeoisie?**
  * **How has the character of the middle class changed over time?**
  * **Can failures of personal capacity explain the downfall of Louis XVI?**
  * **What events of the French Revolution were not anticipated during the Old Regime?**



* * *

**

Week 4: Carl E. Schorske, _Thinking With History_ (Princeton Press, 1998) **

**Schorske's scholarship has been influenced strongly by Sigmund Freud.
Explain how, and give examples. The author uses architectural examples to show
how they serve as a kind of visual mastering of a difficult past.**

**Select comparable examples for a city of your own choice, using Schorske's
form of analysis.**

  * **How does he define modernism?**
  * **What is the "modernist consciousness?" Schorske argues that the ascendancy of history in the consciousness of Europeans began to wane in the second half of the nineteenth century. **
  * **What arguments does he make? Do you agree?**
  * **How would you characterize the role of history in today' s society?**

![vienna2.gif \(14823 bytes\)](../images/gif/vienna2.gif)

**Also: Bring to class the projected topic for your seminar paper accompanied
by a 1-2 page statement of how you intend to proceed.**

**Be prepared to talk about what you plan to do.**

![vienna.gif \(16740 bytes\)](../images/gif/vienna.gif)

* * *

**

Week 5: Women, Gender and History **

![peasmall.jpg \(22591 bytes\)](../images/jpg/peasmall.jpg)

**Read: Joan W. Scott, "Women's History;" TLS essay on feminization.**

**Theme: Women's history emerged as a definable field, Scott says, mainly in
the last two decades.**

  * **Task 1: Select a monograph or substantial scholarly article published before 1970 that deals with social history. Suggest how the research and findings of the historian might have differed if done by someone versed intoday's women's history.**
  * **Task 2: How might the approach be still different if the historian was concerned not with "women's history" but with "gender history?"**

**Write a short paper (750-1,000 words) explaining your response.**

* * *

**

Week 6: Visual Images**

**Read: Ivan Gaskell, "History of Images;" _Images of History_**

**Source:**

**[American Memory Homepage/ Library of
Congress](http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/)**

![blacks.gif \(19235 bytes\)](../images/gif/blacks.gif)

**Reports on: Robert M. Levine, _Images of History;_ Alan Trachtenberg,
_Reading Photographs;_ W. J. T. Mitchell, _Picture Theory;_ Terry Barrett,
_Criticizing Photographs_**

  * **What are the uses (and limitations) of using visual images as historical documents?**
  * **" One problem in using anonymous photographs as documents is that they lose the specificity as referent.**

**We might say that they are symbols rather than documents. " (John Mraz).
Discuss Mraz's observation with reference to Images of History.**

**" The images of traditional photojournalism are documents. A document is
limited to presenting the particular case, lacking the expressivity to
transform it into something more transcendent. When photojournalism enters the
realm of fine art photography, leaning toward the more expressive pole, its
images are often symbols." (John Mraz). Discuss Mraz's observation with
reference to _Images of History._**

![images2.gif \(21495 bytes\)](../images/gif/images2.gif)

* * *

**

Week 7: Non-western historiography**

[![china.gif \(12856
bytes\)](../images/gif/china.gif)](../images/gif/Beijingopera.au)

**Click on image to hear selection from Beijing Opera**

**Select a historian from Asia, Africa, the Middle East, or ancient Greece or
Rome. (Consult with department faculty about this). Especially useful would be
scholars whose work has been published in English if you do not read the
language in which they published. Report on the scholar's contributions,
methodology, use of sources, etc. In what ways does this scholarship differ
from "western" historical writing?**

* * *

**

Week 8: "Old" and "New" Historical Approaches**

[![churchill.jpg \(3554
bytes\)](../images/gif/churchill.jpg)](../media/churchbatt.wav)

**click on portrait for excerpt from WWII speech**

**Read: Burke, "Overture: the New History, its Past and its Future;" Tuck,
"History of Political Thought"**

**Reports on the approach and contributions of:**

          * **Leopold von Ranke**
          * **Marc Bloch**
          * **LeRoy Ladurie**
          * **Charles Beard**
          * **Fredrick Jackson Turner**
          * **Eugene Genovese**
          * **E. P. Thompson**
          * **Fernand Braudel**
          * **Immanuel Wallerstein**
          * **Eric Hobsbawm**
          * **Simon Schama**
          * **Martin J. Sherwin**
          * **Stephan and Abagail Thernstrom**

**(Write a short analytical paper (750-1,000 words) on your subject,
emphasizing methodology, not bibliography.**

* * *

**

Week 9: Psychology, Social Anthropology, and the New Cultural History**

![bbond1.jpg \(9335 bytes\)](../images/gif/bbond1.jpg)

**Read: Roy Porter, "History of the Body;" Giovanni Levi, "On Microhistory."**

**Reports on the approach and contributions of:**

        * **S. R. Suleiman, _The Female Body in Western Culture_**
        * **Michel de Certeau**
        * **Clifford Geertz**
        * **Jacques Derrida**
        * **Michel Foucault**
        * **James Scott**
        * **Norbert Elias**

**Focus: Select a monograph or substantial scholarly article written before
1970 and consider how its findings might have differed if the author had
applied the approach used by the scholar you have selected.**

* * *

**

Week 10: Oral history**

![baseball.gif \(12910 bytes\)](../images/gif/baseball.gif)![schafer.gif
\(13190 bytes\)](../images/gif/schafer.gif)![baseball2.gif \(12587
bytes\)](../images/gif/baseball2.gif)![baseball3.gif \(12514
bytes\)](../images/gif/baseball3.gif)![baseball4.gif \(14623
bytes\)](../images/gif/baseball4.gif)![baseball5.gif \(21283
bytes\)](../images/gif/baseball5.gif)![baseball6.gif \(14481
bytes\)](../images/gif/baseball6.gif)![baseball7.gif \(14074
bytes\)](../images/gif/baseball7.gif)

**Read: Gwyn Prins, "Oral History;" Janaina Amado essay **

**What are the difficulties associated with using oral history? How can we
judge the veracity of an interview?**

**Analyze the methodological approaches and overall contribution of the
following scholars:**

        * **Paul Thompson**
        * **Jan Vansina**
        * **The Brazilian Oral History School (in Portuguese)**
        * **Daphne Patai**
        * **Studs Terkel**
        * **Ron Grele**
        * **Michael Frisch**
        * **David Cataneo**

* * *

**

Week 11: Traditional History: Select a monograph published before 1940 that is
(or was) considered a major contribution. What aspects of the study are still
relevant and valid? What have become "dated?"**

**How would you write a book on the subject given what you know today about
methodology?**

![jeffbldg.jpg \(12971 bytes\)](../images/gif/jeffbldg.jpg)

* * *

[Copyright & Disclaimer](../disclaimer.htm)

* * *

**[![](../images/gif/latback.gif)](../default_old.htm)
[![](../images/gif/umhome.gif)](http://www.miami.edu/) **

