**

SYLLABUS



Madisonville Community College

Madisonville, KY 42431



MONDAYS AND WEDNESDAYS

2:30-3:45 P.M.



Instructor: ROBERT T. ADKINS

1237 Grapevine Road

Madisonville, KY 42431

(502) 821-0218 - HOME

(502) 821-2250, EXT. 2152 - COLLEGE

Room 137

(1st Floor, John H. Gray Building)



OFFICE HOURS POSTED OR BY APPOINTMENT



FALL 1998



  1. History 105:** This course is a survey of the development of European politics, society, and culture from the Age of Absolutism to the present. It is a continuation of HIS 104.
**



  2. Course Title:** History of Europe from the Mid-Seventeenth Century to the  Present



**

  3. Credit Hours:** 3 hours



**

  4. Text and Supplementary Readings:
**



Perry, Chase, Jacob, Jacob, Von Laue. ** _Western Civilization.**_ 5th
Edition, Volume II.



Perry, Peden, Von Laue. ** _Sources of the Western Tradition.**_ 3rd Edition,
Volume II.



**

  5. Course Objectives:
**



The student will be able to:



**

    1. Identify** examples of his/her cultural, social, political, religious, and economic heritage.



**

    2. Analyze** both foreign and domestic issues in the history of the major civilizations studied.



**

    3. Compare** the various European civilizations in selected areas.



**

    4. Evaluate** sources other than textbook and class notes.



**

    5. Communicate** ideas effectively through writing.



**

  6. General Requirements for the Course:
**



    1. Students are required to purchase the textbook ** _Western Civilization,**_ and keep up with the assigned textbook readings. Students are required to purchase ** _Sources of the Western Tradition**_ and keep up with assignments.



_

    2. Tests_. There will be three unit tests plus the Final Examination. At the end of the semester, the grades will be calculated as follows:



Attendance 25

3 unit tests  ..........225

Final Examination... ..........125

Readings Journal _25

_

Total 400



A = 360

B = 320

C = 280

D = 240

E = below 240



1 ABS = - 5

2 ABS = -10

3 ABS = -15

4 ABS = -20

5 ABS = -25



_

Example_ : Attendance....................... 25

Test 1............................... 60

Test 2............................... 70

Test 3............................... 70

Final ......................109

Readings Journal... ....... _20

_

Total...............................354 = B+

Unit Tests will contain both objective and essay sections. The final
Examination will be comprehensive and objective in nature. More instruction on
the Unit Tests and the Final Examination will be given as the semester
progresses.



  7. Each student will be required to keep an **up-to-date Readings Journal**.



Primary source readings are contained in the ** _Sources of the Western
Tradition**_ by Perry, Peden, and Von Laue. Readings Journal entries will
include a one-half to one page personal observation of each reading. The entry
should include a brief summary of the reading as well as a personal
observation of what that particular source reveals about the individual,
people, events, or period.



The Readings Journal should be kept up-to-date because the readings could be
covered on the examinations.



**

  8. Discussion:
**



Questions and discussion will be encouraged during each class session.
Significant contributions to class discussions will influence borderline
grading decisions.



**

  9. Class Notes:
**



Students should take good class notes because many of the test questions will
deal with material covered in the class. However, some questions will be asked
from the textbook and Study Guide Readings to be sure that students are
reading the textbook and readings.



**

  10. Class Attendance is Expected:
**



Each student should make a supreme effort to attend class each time it meets
because you are responsible for the material covered at each meeting. **Roll
will be taken.** Class attendance will have an influence on borderline grading
decisions. Chronic absenteeism will have a definite influence on course
grades.



**

Drop Policy:

**



Students may drop the class up until and including the last day of class with
a grade of "W".



**

  11. Incomplete Grade Policy:
**



Incompletes ("I's") will be granted only in the case of emergencies or extreme
illness.



**

  12. Ethics/Values:
**



Plagiarism and cheating are serious academic offenses. Please refer to the
community college code for definitions and sanctions for these offenses.

**

  13. General Education Competencies:**



The student will demonstrate competency in:

**

    1. Writing** by using standard written English in the composition of identification paragraphs on significant persons, places, and events.
**

    2. Reading** by compiling a satisfactory Readings Journal from selected primary and secondary sources.
**

    3. Integrated Learning** by stating the importance of significant persons, places, and events from other disciplines.
**

    4. Creative and Critical Thinking** by interpreting selected primary and secondary sources.
**

    5. Ethics and Values** by properly crediting sources used in their Readings Journal.



**

  14. General Education Course Specific Competency:
**



The student will be able to recognize the impact of decisive ideas and events
in human heritage.



  15. "Any student requiring individualized classroom accommodations due to a disability should schedule a conference with the Disability Resource Coordinator (Valerie Wolfe, Room 345) at your earliest convenience."

**

Course Outline and Readings:

**



_Date_ _Topic_ _Chapter

_



W 08-26-98 The Enlightenment Chapter 18



M 08-31-98 The Industrial Revolution Chapter 21

W 09-02-98 The Industrial Revolution con't



M 09-07-98 **LABOR DAY

**

W 09-09-98 The French Revolution Chapter 19



M 09-14-98 The French Revolution con't

W 09-16-98 Napoleon Chapter 20



M 09-21-98 Review Items

W 09-23-98 Europe, 1915-1848 Chapter 23



M 09-28-98 **FIRST EXAM

**

W 09-30-98 Thought & Culture Chapters 22 and 24



M 10-05-98 EXAM Discussion

W 10-07-98 Nationalism Chapter 25



M 10-12-98 Nationalism con't

W 10-14-98 Modernization Chapter 26



M 10-19-98 Review Items

W 10-21-98 Imperialism Chapter 27



M 10-26-98 **SECOND EXAM

**

W 10-28-98 The First World War Chapters 29 and 30



M 11-02-98 EXAM Discussion

W 11-04-98 Thought and Culture Chapters 28 and 32



M 11-09-98 Thought and Culture con't

W 11-11-98 Between the Wars Chapter 31



M 11-16-98 Review Items

W 11-18-98 The Second World War Chapter 33



M 11-23-98 **THIRD EXAM

**

W 11-25-98 Europe After 1945 Chapter 34



M 11-30-98 EXAM Discussion

W 12-02-98 **Last Call - Readings Journal

**





M 12-07-98 Review Items

W 12-09-98 The New Globalism Chapter 35



M 12-14-98 **FINAL EXAM









**

HIS 105-01.SYL

