History H399 Introduction to Historical Research  
<http://courses.history.ohio-state.edu/399>[  
](http://courses.history.ohio-state.edu/399)Spring 2002  
Professor K. Austin Kerr  
173 Dulles Hall  
230 West 17th Avenue  
292-2613  
kerr.6@osu.edu  

Dear students:  

I have designed this course with help of some of my colleagues to introduce
you to historical research.  The underlying principle in this introduction is
that the best way to learn historical research is to do historical research.
Thus one important aspect of the course is your presentation of a substantial
research paper at the end of the quarter.  We will also have activities to
inform you about historical research and to hone your research skills.  The
first lesson you will learn is that there is no special "mystique" about
historical research, only careful, logical thought, thoughtful questions, and
thorough inquiry, informed reading--and, in the end, clear presentation.  

You should purchase _The Modern Researcher_ (5th ed.) by Jacques Barzun and
Henry F. Graff, ordered for you at SBX on North High Street.   (In the
assignments, the book is abbreviated as _TMR_.)   Also, a widely used style
manual is **_A Manual for Writers of Term Papers, Theses, and Dissertations
(Chicago Guides to Writing, Editing, and Publishing)_** __ by Kate L.
Turabian, John Grossman, Alice Bennett.  

In this course you will complete a substantial research paper based on primary
sources, preferably on a subject where I can be of help.  

Please understand that this course is a seminar.  You are a "member" of this
seminar.  The seminar organization means that as a member you will work
independently, but you will also join in discussions and present your research
work for criticism and challenge by your classmates.  You, in turn, will
criticize and challenge the work of your classmates (note, please, that the
word "critical" does not mean, "negative").  

The organization of the seminar includes semiweekly meetings to discuss
readings and exercises completed in common by every member.  Toward the end of
the quarter each of you will present your work to the seminar, both orally and
in writing.  As a member, thus, you will attend faithfully, and come prepared
by critically reading in advance the work presented.  (Always notify me in
advance if illness or emergency forces your absence; otherwise, come to our
meeting!)  

At the end of the quarter you will present me with a revised paper of about 20
double-spaced pages ( _ca._ 5,000 words) with appropriate footnotes or
endnotes (you will not go wrong if you use the recommended _Manual_ ).  This
paper will comprise 75% of your grade in the course. The other 25% of your
grade will arise from my evaluation of your participation in the seminar
meetings.  

Here is the schedule of our meetings:  

|

Date

|

Subject

|

Assignment and Activity  
  
---|---|---  
  
4/1

Week 1

|

Introduction to Course

Choosing a Topic

|

Prof.: Review library subject sources; Discuss differences between primary and
secondary sources; Discuss methods of evaluating books, including locating
scholarly book reviews; Discuss methods of locating scholarly articles  
  
4/3

|

Using the library

|

Professor David Lincove, room 124 Main Library  
  
4/8

Week 2

|

What is my topic?

Why is that my topic?

|

TMR, vii-47; complete exercises at http://gateway.lib.ohio-
state.edu/tutor/les1/ and http://gateway.lib.ohio-state.edu/tutor/history/;
find one book as a secondary source for your topic, and evaluate that source
(evaluation includes reading at least two scholarly reviews of it).  Present a
5-minute report on your discovery.  
  
4/10

Week 2

|

Finding and verifying facts

Organizing research materials

|

TMR, 48-133  
  
4/15

Week 3

|



|

Brief oral report with examples of completed research  
  
4/17

Week 3

|

Special techniques: oral history

|

Discuss examples of oral history; TMR, 134-198  
  
4/22

Week 4

|

Special techniques: quantitative analysis

|

Discuss examples of quantitative analysis; TMR, 201-316  
  
4/24

Week 4

|

Presenting your work

|

TMR, 348-90; progress reports*  
  
4/29

Week 5

|



|

Progress reports  
  
5/1

Week 5

|



|

Progress reports  
  
5/6

Week 6

|



|

Progress reports  
  
5/8

|



|

  
  
5/13

Week 7

|



|

  
  
5/15

|



|

  
  
5/20

Week 8

|



|

  
  
5/22

|



|

Drafts of papers presented for discussion  
  
5/27

Week 9

|



|

Memorial Day  Holiday  
  
5/29

|



|

Drafts of papers presented for discussion  
  
6/3

Week 10

|



|

Paper revision  
  
6/7

|



|

Spring barbecue (tentative)  
  
6/11

|



|

Final Papers due  
  
The University has excellent library collections, and an Archive that houses
the official records of the institution.  Other appropriate special
collections include the Cartoon Research Library.  The principal limitations
on using special collections are the hours they are available; you will have
to work in their resources during the day and, in the case of the University
Archives, travel to its site on Kenny Road.

The Ohio Historical Society is a major repository of materials that are Ohio-
related.  OHS is located on the state fairgrounds, near Interstate 71 at the
17th avenue exit.  Its library is open 9-5 Tuesday through Saturday (closed on
state holidays).  The Society has the best collection of Ohio newspapers
available, as well as collections of other printed materials, and a wealth of
manuscript holdings.  The OHS web site, http://www.ohiohistory.org , has a
link to its on-line catalog.

The State Library in downtown Columbus is another important resource.  You can
access its collections through Ohio Link.  The main building downtown of the
Columbus Metropolitan Library also has some special collections of local
material.

We have placed possible paper topics on the course web page at
http://courses.history.ohio-state.edu/399/SuggestedPapers.htm



![](ablrule.gif)

* These progress reports are formal written documents, not more than 5 pages in length (or no more than 1500 words).  Your progress report will include a tentative first paragraph for your paper win which you state the principal problem you are addressing, and suggest the thesis, or main idea, that you expect to convey in your finished paper.  You should also include some substantial results of research, with appropriate footnote citations.



