### History 504.01  
WAR IN THE ANCIENT MEDITERRANEAN WORLD



**Readings**

_Required Books_ :

  1. Arrian, _The Campaigns of Alexander_ , Penguin 
  2. Caesar _The Conquest of Gaul_ , Penguin 
  3. Campbell, B. _The Roman Army, 31 BC-AD 337_ , Routledge 
  4. Herodotus _The Persian Wars_ , Modern Library 
  5. Homer _The Iliad_ , tr. Lattimore, University of Chicago Press 
  6. Livy _The War With Hannibal_ , Penguin 
  7. Polybius _The Rise of the Roman Empire_ , Penguin 
  8. Sage, M. _Warfare in Ancient Greece_ , Routledge 
  9. Thucydides _The Peloponnesian War_ , Modern Library 

_Recommended Books_ :

  1. Drews, R. _The End of the Bronze Age_ , Princeton University Press 
  2. Engles, D. _Alexander the Great and the Logistics of the Macedonian Army_ , University of California Press 
  3. Ferrill, A. _The Origins of War_ , Thames and Hudson 
  4. _idem._ _The Fall of the Roman Empire: The Military Explanation_ , Thames and Hudson 
  5. Hansen, V. _The Western Way of War_ , Oxford 
  6. Luttwak, E. _The Grand Strategy of the Roman Empire_ , Johns Hopkins University Press 



**Objectives:** This course offers an advanced survey of military history from
the Bronze Age in Greece (ca. 1200 B.C.) to the fall of the Roman Empire in
the West (A.D. 476) and focuses on six interconnected themes: tactical and
technological developments in warfare; military strategy and interstate
diplomacy; the reciprocal effects of war and political systems upon one
another; the social and economic bases of military activity; conversely, the
impact of war on society, particularly its role in the economy and its effect
upon the lives of both participants and non-combatants; finally, the
ideological dimensions of war. In addition, students will be introduced to
some of the basic problems which historians of the period are currently
attempting to solve as well as to some of the most important hypotheses their
work has produced. In the process, students will become acquainted with
certain of the principal research tools and techniques which ancient
historians have developed to aid them in their investigations.



**Requirements:** Undergraduate students in this course will be required to
take a mid-term and a final examination and to turn in an eight to ten page
book review on one of the recommended books listed above, each of which must
be completed in order to pass the class. Late papers will not be accepted. A
student's grade will be determined as follows: the mid-term exam will count
for twenty-five percent of the final grade; the eight to ten page book review
will count for twenty-five percent; and the final exam will comprise the
remaining fifty percent. Graduate students' exams will be graded on a standard
more appropriate to their status, and they will be expected to write a
substantially longer term paper (in the twenty to twenty-five page range) on a
more challenging topic to be developed individually in consultation with the
instructor. The weighting of the various components will be the same as for
undergraduates. _Students should be aware that the required readings for this
course are heavy, about 260 pages per week. Students interested in an easy
course should look elsewhere_.

All students must be officially enrolled in the course by the end of the
second full week of the quarter. No requests to add the course will be
approved by the department chair after that time. Enrolling officially and on
time is solely the responsibility of each student.



**Statement on Academic Misconduct:** Students are reminded that all work for
the course must be their own. Passing someone else's work off as your own
constitutes plagiarism. This or any other form of academic misconduct, such as
cheating on exams, will be dealt through the procedures established by the
Committee on Academic Misconduct.



**Schedule of Lectures and Reading Assignments**

_First Week_

  1. War in a Pre-Industrial World 
  2. Homeric Warfare and the Origins of the Phalanx 
    1. Homer, _Iliad_ Books 3-8; 11-16 
  3. Hoplites and Phalanges: The Experience of Battle 
    1. Sage, _Warfare_ : 25-40, 72-81, 94-107  



_Second Week_

  1. War and Society in the Archaic Age of Greece 
    1. Sage, _Warfare_ : 40-72, 107-134 
  2. The Origins of the Persian Wars 
    1. Sage, _Warfare_ : 81-90 
    2. Herodotus, Book 1, chapters 1-130, 5.28-6.140 
  3. Greece Against Persia 
    1. Herodotus, 7.1-9.89 



_Third Week_

  1. Seapower and The Rise of the Athenian Empire 
    1. Herodotus, 9.90-122 
    2. Thucydides, 1.89-117 
  2. The Peloponnesian War: Origins, Strategies, and Early Encounters 
    1. Thucydides, 1.1-88, 1.118-146; 2.1-103 
  3. The Peloponnesian War: The Middle Stages 
    1. Thucydides, 3-5 (entire) 



_Fourth Week_

  1. The Peloponnesian War: The Final Phases 
    1. Thucydides, 6-8 (entire) 
  2. War and Diplomacy in the Aftermath of the Peloponnesian War 
  3. The Fourth Century: A Military Revolution? 
    1. Sage, _Warfare_ : 135-161. 



_Fifth Week_

  1. Philip II and the Rise of Macedon 
    1. Sage, _Warfare_ : 162-181 
  2. Alexander the Great: The March to Persia 
    1. Arrian, 1.1-16, 2.2-27, 3.6-15 
  3. Alexander the Great: Conquest and Retreat 
    1. Arrian, 3.16-22, 4.16-5.4, 5.25-29, 6.1-30 



_Sixth Week_ \-- **MIDTERM**

  1. The Hellenistic Age and Early Rome 
    1. Sage, _Warfare_ : 197-227 
  2. The Foundations of the Roman Empire 
    1. Polybius, 6.19-42, 18.28-32 



_Seventh Week_

  1. The Hannibalic War: Origins, Strategies and Early Encounters 
    1. Polybius, 2.1, .13, .36; 3.1-118, 6.58 
    2. Livy, 21-22 (optional) 
  2. The Hannibalic War: From Cannae to the Metaurus 
    1. Polybius, 7.9, 8.3-7, 9.3-11, .22-26, 11.1-3, .19 
    2. Livy, 23-27 (entire) 
  3. The Hannibalic War: The Defeat of Carthage 
    1. Polybius, 10.2-40, 14.1-11, 15.1-19 
    2. Livy 28-30 (entire) 



_Eighth Week_

  1. The Conquest: Greece, the Near East, and Spain 
    1. Polybius, 18.1-12 
  2. War and Society in the Second and First Centuries B.C.E. 
  3. Caesar and Gaul 
    1. Caesar, _The Conquest of Gaul_ (entire) 



_Ninth Week_ \-- NO CLASS ON MEMORIAL DAY; TERM PAPER DUE

  1. Augustus and the Creation of the Imperial Army 
    1. Campbell, _Roman Army_ : 1-78, 181-192 
  2. "Grand Strategy" and the Army at War 
    1. Campbell, _Roman Army_ : 79-109 



_Tenth Week_

  1. The Army at Peace 
    1. Campbell, _Roman Army_ : 110-180, 193-231 
  2. The Crisis of the Third Century 
    1. Campbell, _Roman Army_ : 231-249 
  3. The "Fall" of the Roman Empire and War in the Early Middle Ages 



**Final Exam: TUESDAY, June 10, 7:30-9:18AM**

