![](sm_world.gif)

Syllabus

History 231: Origins of the Contemporary World

Summer 2002

Professor Edward Hanlon

**Tuesday,Wednesday, Thursday; Period 3.**

**Office 4307N; Phone 237-8856**

**Office Hours: Tuesdays, 1:15-2:15 & by appointment.**



Course Description:

**This course is a survey of the histories, politics, societies, religions,
and philosophies in Africa, Asia, Europe, the Middle East, and the Americas
from about 6000 B.C.E. to 1650 C.E. The semester will begin with the discovery
of agriculture and the development of the first agrarian civilizations and end
with the European exploration and expansion over the Earth.**

**The first part of the course will explore the development of the first
agrarian civilization in the river valleys of Mesopotamia, Egypt, India, and
China. During this exploration we will discover how settled agriculture freed
people and resources for purposes such as manufacturing,trade, development of
religion, politics, war, and writing. Additionally, discussion of religious
and philosophical development will compose an important part of the beginning
of the course.**

**The second part will look at developed empires such as the Roman Empire and
the empire of Han China to clearly illustrate how humans attempt to solve
problems of war, social problems, and rulership. During the latter part of the
course we will see how other civilizations built upon the foundations of the
ancients. The Islamic World, Tang China, and the nations of Europe will be
especially discussed.**

**One of the main objectives of this course is to offer a non-Eurocentric
approach to the history of the world. This means that Europe and the west will
not be at the center of the course. Cultures and societies that developed in
Africa, Asia, and the Americas will be looked at for their own contributions
to the world at large, and not in the context of their contact with the
west.**

Procedure:

  * **Lectures on major themes.**
  * **Class discussion on the day's topic.**
  * **Group work on selected subjects.**
  * **Films on art, civilization, culture, and related matters.**



**Course Objectives: **

  * **To provide an understanding of the roots and development of the world's values and morals.**
  * **To increase knowledge and understanding of Ancient History in general, and key historical events in particular.**
  * **To increase student's ability to evaluate ideas and arguments critically, to weigh historical evidence, and to draw conclusions.**
  * **To improve student's ability to communicate ideas and arguments concisely, accurately, and informatively orally and in writing.**

Testing:

**There will be a mid-term exam and a final. Additionally, quizzes will be
given on a weekly basis.**

There will be no make-up tests or quizzes given.



_

Midterm Examination_. The midterm covers first portion of the course. I will
provide you with more details later. In order to complete the midterm, you
must have a good grasp of World geography. A firm grasp of geography is
essential to understanding history. Be sure you are able to identify from a
map all of the major empires studied up to the midterm exam. You can use any
reputable atlas to learn this. Here are some web sites:

[http://www.lib.utexas.edu/Libs/PCL/Map_collection
](http://www.lib.utexas.edu/Libs/PCL/Map_collection)

<http://research.umbc.edu/~roswell/mipage.html>

_Final Examination_. The Final will be cumulative covering the entire course.
I expect you to integrate information into cohesive arguments, and demonstrate
that you have achieved the course objectives stated above. You must be
familiar with geography in order to take the final exam.



_

Class Participation._ You must contribute to the class discussions and remain
engaged in lectures, films, and presentations. Do not simply sit in class and
take notes. Those who sleep in class will receive a poor participation grade.
In addition, I will use this portion to evaluate your contribution to the
class at other times, your attendance, cooperation, and your dedication to
excellence.

Attendance:

**Attendance is Mandatory!** **The professor in unable to grant excused
absences; only the registrar can do so. After four absences the professor will
be obliged to drop the student.**

Text:



_

Readings_:

You must complete these! I cannot stress enough the importance of
accomplishing the readings _before_ class meets. In many instances, we will
spend a     portion of the period discussing readings; you cannot participate
effectively if you are not prepared. I will not permit those students who
choose not to prepare for class to participate with those who do prepare (to
benefit, so to speak, from work they have not done).

> (1) In some instances, the course schedule tells you to scan a particular
selection, or visit a particular web site. In these cases, I would like you to
be aware of the content and the subject matter, but do not require you to read
these as closely as you would your texts. In other instances, the reading
schedule lists optional items. These are there for you to look at if you like.

> (2) Bring your text to class with you each day they are assigned. I want you
to have these available because I will often refer to portions of them and in
some instances we will read from them. Bring the other books when there are
readings assigned. For selections off the web, in some cases I've directed you
to bring in a printed copy for reference.

> (3) Plan you readings ahead. Work ahead and come to class prepared. Some
days have a heavy reading load and others have a light load. The key is to
stay current and not fall behind!

> (4) If you anticipate or have trouble with the readings, either
understanding them or keeping up with them, let me know so that I can work
with you.

> * * *

Schedule

**  June 4** | Course Introduction, Syllabus. The First Civilizations: Chapter
1, p. 2-35.  
---|---  
  
**  June 5** | **Kingdoms and Empires of the Near East**  
  
**  June 6** | **Film: Iraq.**  
  
**  June 11** | **Revolutions in Thought and Religion: Chapter 2, p. 36-51.**  
  
**  June 12** | **Film: India. Chapter 4, p. 120-126, 132-133.**  
  
**  June 13** | **Ancient Greece: Chapter 3, p. 72-100.**  
  
**  June 18** | **Greek Philosophy:Chapter 2, p.
56-65.[Lecture.](http://web.jjay.cuny.edu/~ehanlon/philos/index.htm)**  
  
**  June 19** | **The Hellenistic World: Chapter 3, p. 100-111.**  
  
**  June 20** | **Republican Rome: Chapter 5, p. 134-148.**  
  
**  June 25** | **Imperial Rome and Christianity: Chapter 5, p. 148-171.**  
  
**  June 26** | **Film: China. Imperial China: Chapter 8, p. 216-242.**  
  
**  June 27** | **Imperial China: Chapter 8, p. 242-249.**  
  
**  July 2** | **Mid-Term Exam**  
**

July 3** | **Japan: Chapter 9, p. 250-277.**  
  
**  July 4** | **Independence Day: No Class**  
  
**July 9** | **The Islamic World: Chapter 11, p. 298-313.**  
  
**  July 10** | **Islamic Kingdoms: Chapter 14, p. 274-395.**  
  
**  July 11** | **Europe: Early and Middle Ages: Chapter 12, p. 315-337.**  
  
**  July 16** | **Europe: Middle Ages: Chapter 13, p. 338-373.**  
  
**  July 17** | **Film: The Americas. Civilizations of the Americas: Chapter
15, p. 396-419.**  
  
**  July 18** | **Civilizations of the Americas.**  
  
**  July 23** | **Europe: The Late Middle Ages and Renaissance: Chapter 16, p.
424-447.**  
  
**  July 24** | **Europe During the Renaissance and Reformation: Chapter 17,
p. 448-493.**  
  
**  July 25** | **Final Exam**  
      
    
    		

* * *

[ Class Materials](http://web.jjay.cuny.edu/~ehanlon/clas.htm)

[Links](http://web.jjay.cuny.edu/~ehanlon/lnk.htm)

[Home](http://web.jjay.cuny.edu/~ehanlon/his231.htm)

* * *

