### HISTORY 542.01  
INTELLECTUAL AND SOCIAL MOVEMENTS IN THE MUSLIM WORLD



**In general:**

_Description_ : This course explores significant intellectual and social
movements that have arisen among Muslims from the inception of Islam in 610
C.E. until the present. We will consider and compare a broad range of
movements that have appeared not only in the Islamic "heartland" in the Middle
East but also in Africa and South, Southeast, and Central Asia. No prior
knowledge of Islam or its history is assumed although students with background
knowledge are welcome.

_Objectives_ : It is hoped that students will gain an appreciation of
contemporary movements in the Muslim world by understanding their historical
antecedents. Since the course covers a broad geographical range, students will
also have the opportunity to acquire sensitivity to the regional variations
among these movements.

_Format_ : Each class session will consist of an hour of lecture followed by
an hour of discussion. At the end of each class, I will pose a question to
guide the following class's discussion. You should read your texts with this
question in mind and prepare to discuss the question, bringing in relevant
examples from the texts. (You may, of course, challenge the question or raise
questions or problems of your own.) For the discussions, the class will divide
into three groups. Each group will talk amongst themselves for 20-30 minutes;
afterwards, the groups will come together to share their conclusions. The
purpose of these discussions is to encourage students to synthesize material
from several different sources in response to a specific question and to
evaluate historical sources critically. In some cases, audio-visual aids
(films, slides, tapes) will be used to reinforce material presented in
readings and lectures.



**Written assignments:**

  1. A brief _map exercise_. 
  2. A _midterm examination_. The exam will consist of several identifications and one essay question; it will cover material presented during the first half of the course. 
  3. A _term paper_ of roughly 10 pages (15 for graduate students) analyzing a particular movement or comparing specific movements in two or more different periods and/or regions. The latter approach is strongly encouraged and is _required for graduate students_. 
  4. A comprehensive _final examination_. The exam will consist of several identifications and two essay questions. 



**Grading:**

    
    
                                 Undergraduates   Graduates 
    
    attendance and discussions         15%           15%
    map exercise                        5%            5%
    midterm                            25%           20%       
    term paper                         25%           40% 
    final                              30%           20%
    
    

All assignments are due _in class_ on the dates specified above. Late work
will be downgraded by one letter grade for each day it is late. Work that is
four or more days late will not be accepted. I do not give incompletes. If you
are unable to complete the quarter's work on schedule, be prepared to turn in
what you have accomplished or accept an  "E". Exceptions to this policy will
be made only in dire circumstances (e.g., serious illness, death in the
family), which _must_ be documented.



**Readings:**

The following books are required for the course and are available at SBX,
Long's, and the University Bookstore. They have also been placed on closed
reserve at the Main Library.

  1. Ira M. Lapidus, _A History of Islamic Societies_ (Cambridge, 1988) 
  2. Bernard Lewis, ed. and trans., _Islam from the Prophet Muhammad to the Capture of Constantinople_ (New York, 1974, pb 1987) 
    * Vol. I: _Politics and War_
    * Vol. II: _Religion and Society_
  3. Dilip Hiro, _Holy Wars: The Rise of Islamic Fundamentalism_ (New York, 1989) 
  4. John L. Esposito, ed., _Voices of Resurgent Islam_ (New York, 1983) 
  5. V.S. Naipaul, _Among the Believers: An Islamic Journey_ (New York, 1981) 



We shall also read a number of chapters and articles not included in the
above-mentioned texts. Copies of these selections will be distributed in
class; the books from which they are taken have also been placed on reserve.
These books are as follows:

  1. Marshall G.S. Hodgson, _The Venture of Islam_ , Vol. I: _The Classical Age of Islam_ (Chicago, 1974) 
  2. Muhammad U. Memon, _Ibn Taim_ya's Struggle against Popular Religion_ (The Hague and Paris, 1976) 
  3. Madeline C. Zilfi, _The Politics of Piety: The Ottoman Ulema in the Post-Classical Age, 1600-1800_ (Minneapolis, 1988) 
  4. Lesley Blanch, _The Sabres of Paradise_ (New York, 1960) 
  5. F.R. Wingate, _Ten Years' Captivity in the Mahdi's Camp, 1882-1892_ , from the manuscripts of Father Joseph Ohrwalder (London, 1892, 1986) 



**Suggestions for reading**

Always read critically. You will find that the authors we read display a
variety of attitudes toward Islam. Naipaul's attitudes are especially
problematic. Ask yourself what features of each author's background,
discipline, and professional experience affect his attitude and approach
(footnotes, bibliography, and acknowledgements often provide keys to this
question). If you read two or more texts on a given topic, compare the
authors' approaches and use of primary sources. As you consider various
movements, keep the following general questions in mind:

  1. How are different movements affected by the historical, regional, and cultural contexts in which they arise? 
  2. Can any of these movements be defined as "fundamentalist"? Do Muslims differ in their definitions of Islam's "fundamentals"? 
  3. Is there a difference between Islamic and Muslim movements? 
  4. How do these movements respond to mysticism and messianism? 
  5. How has Islam been used as a vehicle for reform or revolution? 
  6. What problems does the study of Islamic movements present? 



**Schedule of Readings and Activities**

    
    
    3/28   a) Introduction to the course
           b) Geography and demography
           c) Tour of Middle East and Judaic collection, Main Library
    
    
    3/30   The life of Muhammad and the advent of Islam
    
           Hodgson, _Venture of Islam_ , I: 3-22
           Lapidus, 3-36
           Lewis, _II_ : Introduction, No. 8
    
    
    4/4    Muhammad's death and the schism over the caliphate:  Sunnis,
              Shicites, Kharijites
    
           Lapidus, 37-67
           Lewis, _I_ :  Introduction to Section 1; Nos. 1-3, 39, 40 
    
           Map exercise handed out
    
    
    4/6    Quran, had_th, and the roots of Islamic theology
    
           Film: "The Guests of God"
    
           Lapidus, 28-31, 98-109, 115-19
           Lewis, _II_ : Nos. 1, 15, 16, 38, 39, 61, 62
    
    
    4/11   The beginnings of accretion:  development of the Sunni legal schools
    
           Lapidus, 102-5, 164-5
           Lewis, _II_ : Nos. 9-11, 13
    
           _Map exercise due_
    
    
    4/13   The first Islamic social movement? - The Hanbali school and its context
    
           Lapidus, 120-5, 164-7, 172-80
           Lewis, _II_ : 5, 10 (a Hanbali legal opinion)
    
    
    4/18   Reactions to mysticism:  Ibn Taimiyya  (1263-1328)
    
           Lapidus, 109-15, 168-71, 181-4
           Memon, _Ibn Taim_ya's Struggle against Popular Religion_ , 23-46,
              57-72, 254-65
           Lewis, _II_ : No. 10 (to remind you that Ibn Taimiyya wrote other
              things besides diatribes against sufis)
    
    
    4/20   Muslim rigor in medieval Morocco: Almoravids and Almohads 
    
           Lapidus, 365-89
    
    
    4/25   1) _Midterm examination_
           2) A 17th-century reforming movement in the Ottoman Empire: The
                 Kad_zadelis and their legacy
    
           Zilfi, Politics of Piety, 129-81
    
           Recommended: Lapidus, 303-43
    
    
    4/27   Late 18th-century reform: Wahhabism, neo-orthodox sufism
    
           Film:  "For Those Who Sail to Heaven"
    
           Lapidus, 359-64, 564-6, 673-4
           Hiro, 36-43
           R.S. O'Fahey and Berndt Radtke, "Neo-Sufism Reconsidered,"
              _Der Islam_ 70.1 (1993): 52-87 (to be distributed)
    
    
    5/2    Islam vs. imperialism I: Pan-Islam - Jamal al-Din al- Afghani, the
              Deoband college and the Khilafat movement in India, the Murid
              movement in the Caucasus
    
           Lapidus, 571-9, 615-22, 718-42, 815-17
           Hiro, 44-59
           Blanch, _The Sabres of Paradise_ , 45-59, 125-9, 404-10
    
    
    5/4    Islam vs. imperialism II:  the Mahdi in the Sudan, _jih_d_
              movements in West Africa
    
           Lapidus, 489-523, 852-9
           Wingate/Ohrwalder, Ten Years' Captivity in the Mahdi's Camp, 6-21
    
    
    5/9    Reaction against early 20th-century secularism:  The Muslim Brotherhood
    
           Hiro, 60-107
           Esposito, 67-98
    
           Recommended: Lapidus, 615-36
    
           _Statement of term paper topic due_
    
    
    5/11   The legacy of Wahhabism in Saudi Arabia
    
           Lapidus, 674-5
           Hiro, 108-41
    
    
    5/16   Shicism and the Iranian revolution
    
           Hiro, 142-207 Recommended: 287-300
           Naipaul, 7-80
           Esposito, 150-74 Recommended: 191-214
    
    
    5/18   Mobilization of Shicite minorities
    
           Film:  "Iran Adrift in a Sea of Blood"
    
           Hiro, 207-26
           Lapidus, 644-58
    
    
    5/23   Sunni Islam as state law:  Pakistan and the Sudan
    
           Naipaul, 81-209
           Esposito, 241-60  Recommended:  99-133, 175-90, 218-40, 268-91 
           Recommended:  Lapidus, 736-48, 852-9 (review)
    
    
    5/25   Sunni mobilization in Egypt, North Africa, and the Pacific Rim
    
           Lapidus, 626-36, 680-717 Recommended: 749-83
           Hiro, 285-7
           Naipaul, 211-361
    
           newspaper clippings to be distributed
    
    
    5/30   Politicized Islam in the New World Order: Hamas; trends in Afghanistan,
              Central Asia, South Asia
    
           Film: "Islamic Fundamentalism and Democracy"
    
           Lapidus, 784-822
           Hiro, 300-11
    
           newspaper clippings to be distributed
    
    
    6/1    Bosnian Islam and the civil war]
    
           Readings from Rabia Ali and Lawrence Lifschultz, eds., _Why Bosnia?_
              _Writings on the Balkan War_ (Stony Creek, CT, 1993) - to be
              Distributed
    
           newspaper clippings to be distributed
    
           _Papers due_
    

