#  **ANCIENT HISTORY I**

#  **EUH 2011**

COURSE SYLLABUS Spring Semester 1998, SOC 151 (M 6-9) Rev. 4/14/98
\--------------- Professor: [William M.
Murray](mailto:murray@luna.cas.usf.edu)  (Click on name to send an email
message) Office: SOC 242 (phone:974-3139) Office Hours: MW 4-5 PM, M 5-6 PM
and by appointment   NEW ADDITION!! Check out these maps (useful in preparing
for the final exam) [Greece
1](http://luna.cas.usf.edu/~murray/cg/grk1map.gif), [Greece
2](http://luna.cas.usf.edu/~murray/cg/grk2map.jpg) [Check out the Final
Examination Study Guide](http://luna.cas.usf.edu/~murray/ahstguide_f.htm)
[Follow this link for Useful Study
Aids](http://luna.cas.usf.edu/~murray/studyaids.htm)

THE COURSE.  During this semester, we will study the development of western
civilization--our civilization--from its humble beginnings in Near Eastern
farming villages more than 10,000 years ago to the Hellenistic civilization
fostered by the conquests of Alexander the Great.  We will start when
humankind emerged from cave shelters to sow crops and domesticate animals, to
build cities, and to devise the complex system of social relationships we call
civilization. We will see how the invention of writing allows the study of
"history," and how it allows us to observe the systems of government, society,
and laws of the ancients. Through preserved ancient writing, we will also
observe the formation of states, nations and empires in a repeating cycle that
recurs with infinite variations over and over throughout the brief period of
humankind's recorded history.  This course will try to demonstrate how similar
we are in many ways to our ancient relatives, and how our basic
characteristics as a species remain unchanged. Due to the span of time we
examine, we will be moving quickly from one period to another, and the effect
may at times be confusing.  Hang in there. I promise that it will all come
together.  Above all I want to get you to think and to analyze, to question
"facts" and to develop your own opinions, for these are the true benefits of
studying history.

THE BOOKS.  Our basic texts for this course are:  
**     Knapp = **A. B. Knapp. _The History and Culture of Ancient Western Asia
& Egypt._ 4th ed.  
        Chicago, 1988.   
**     Martin = **[Thomas Martin. _Ancient Greece._   Yale Univ. Press.
1996.](http://hydra.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/text?lookup=trm+ov+toc)

We will also examine original sources from:  
**     Bailkey = **N.M. Bailkey. _Readings in Ancient History._ Lexington,
Mass. 5th ed., 1996.  
**     [The Perseus Project Database.](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/)**  A
whole host of useful information that is relevant to  
        Greek history can be found at the following URL (<http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/>).   
    
REQUIREMENTS.  There will be two map quizzes, and two in-class essay exams.
In order to "help" you keep up with your reading assignments, there will be a
**_simple_** quiz at the beginning of each class period.   The quizzes are
designed to see if you have read the assignments **_and will necessarily be of
a general nature_**.   The first essay exam will constitute 30% of your grade,
the second one 50% and the quizzes and class participation/attendance the
remaining 20%. ______________________________ __Tentative_ Lecture Schedule,
Reading  & Report Assignments_ **Wk. 1 (1/5):** Intro. to the study of ancient
history.   History vs. Prehistory. Archaeology as a  
    tool.  << Knapp 1-10 >>   
    
**Wk. 2 (1/12):** The Agricultural Revolution. Urbanization in the Near East.
The invention of  
    writing. The Third Millennium: Sumer, Akkad, Ur III. << Knapp 11-60; B #1-3, #17.A >>   
    
**Wk 3 (1/19):** NO CLASS.   MLK Jr. HOLIDAY.  
    
**Wk 4 (1/26):** The Third Millennium: Sumer, Akkad, Ur III, Egypt, Syria-
Palestine.  << Knapp  
    61-134; B #8-10 >>   See note below week 5 for the Study Aid Link.. 

**Wk. 5 (2/2):** The Second Millennium: Babylon and Assyria. The Law Code of
Hammurapi.  
    The Middle Kingdom in Egypt. The Hyksos. The New Kingdom.  Be sure to look at the   
    [Midterm Study Guide](http://luna.cas.usf.edu/~murray/ahstguide_m.htm).  << Knapp 135-82; B #7, #11-14 >> **====================** Be sure to check out the [Study Aid link](http://luna.cas.usf.edu/~murray/studyaids.htm) that I am constructing for this class.  Let me know what you'd like me to add to it and I will add it if I can.  Note that this is different from the [Midterm Study Guide](http://luna.cas.usf.edu/~murray/ahstguide_m.htm). **====================**

**Week 6 (2/9):** Syria-Palestine, Anatolia and the Aegean: Hittites, Minoans
and Mycenaeans.  
    Hebrew Monotheism.  << Knapp 183-254; B #14-16, #17B-D, F-G >> 

**Wk. 7 (2/16):** FIRST ESSAY EXAM. The geography and climate of Greece.  
    
**Wk. 8 (2/23):** The Greek "Dark Age." Homer and Hesiod.  << Martin 1-4,
36-50; B #19, #20>>  
    
**Wk. 9 (3/2):** The Formation of the Archaic Polis. Trade and Colonization.
Lyric Poets. Tyrants  
    & the Hoplite Reform.  << Martin 51-81; B 21; A selection from [Victor Hanson, _The_](http://luna.cas.usf.edu/~murray/hanson27-39.htm)   
_     [Western Way of War](http://luna.cas.usf.edu/~murray/hanson27-39.htm)_.
>>  
    
**Mar. 9-13: Spring Break.**  
    
**Wk. 10 (3/16):** Athens in the 6th century: Solon, Pisistratus and
Clisthenes. Archaic Art and  
    Architecture. << Martin 81-93; B #22, #23 >>   
    
**Wk. 11 (3/23):** Spartan militarism and the Peloponnesian League. The
Persian Empire:  
    Assyria, Media, Babylonia and Persia. Herodotus the first Greek historian and the Persian   
    Wars.  << Martin 94-105; Knapp 254-67; B #25, #26 (pp. 185-87, 193-99) >>   
    
**Wk. 12 (3/30):** Athenian Democracy and Empire. Classical Civilization.  <<
Martin 105-46; B  
    #28, #29 >>   
    
**Wk. 13 (4/6):** The Peloponnesian War.  << Martin 147-73; B #30A-D (also pp.
214-15) >>  
    
**Wk. 14 (4/13):** The Aftermath of the Pelop. War. Philip II of Macedon.  <<
Martin 173-90; B  
    #31, #35 >>   
    
**Wk. 15 (4/20):** Alexander the Great. Cultural interchange in the
Hellenistic Age.  << Martin  
    191-221; Plutarch _Alexander_ (Follow this [link](http://luna.cas.usf.edu/~murray/ah/plut_alexander.htm) for Plutarch's biography of Alexander.  You   
    might also consulkt a copy of this text in the USF library). >>   
    
**April 27 th (6-8 PM): FINAL EXAMINATION (in SOC 151)**

