Syllabus - Monument and Memory in Asian History

Professor Meyer-Fong  
Gilman 400  
email: tmeyerf@jhunix.hcf.jhu.edu  
phone #: 516-3324  
Office Hours: Wednesdays, 1-2:30, or by appointment

|

![](../graphics/logo.gif)  
  
---|---  
  


**Course Description:**

Sites like the Forbidden City, the Taj Mahal, and Angkor Wat conjure images
that often have more to do with fantasy than fact. Why (and how) were these
monuments first made? What forces have transformed them into symbols of
national identity and cultural otherness? This research seminar will explore
the ritual, political, historical, and religious significance of monumental
sites in Asia. We will also examine their more recent role as signifiers of
cultural and national identities--and in tourism.

**Required Readings:**

> 1) Course Reader

>

> 2) Arthur Waldron. _The Great Wall of China from History to Myth._
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.

>

> 3) Peter Hopkirk. _Foreign Devils on the Silk Road: The Search for Lost
Cities and Treasures in Chinese Central Asia._ Boston: University of
Massachusetts Press, 1984.

**Grading:**

> Weekly Reading Responses: 15%  
>  Class Participation: 20%  
>  Presentation: 15%  
>  Final Paper (15-20 pp): 50%

**Each week, students will turn in a reading response abstract (approximately
1-2 pages). The abstract should respond to the materials assigned for a given
week. The weekly reading response papers should discuss and analyze the major
arguments or themes of the readings assigned for a given day in preparation
for an organized and stimulating discussion in class. If the assigned reading
is an academic article, it is always a good idea to identify the author's
thesis or main idea in relation to the broader themes of the class. If the
reading is a primary source, it is generally useful to identify the main
themes and relate them to the larger aims of the course. Reading response
abstracts are due in class, and late papers are not accepted, except in cases
of illness or with prior permission of the instructor. Students who miss class
will still be expected to submit reading response abstracts to the professor's
mailbox **before** class. You are entitled to opt out of _one_ response
abstract (each student is expected to write ten abstracts over the course of
the term, the last two weeks are devoted to student presentations, and are
thus without readings to respond to! ).

**The class participation grade will be based on the student's preparation for
and contribution to class discussion. This class is a seminar centered around
the discussion of assigned texts. To that end, all students are required to
complete the assigned readings before scheduled class meetings. A student's
class participation grade will be evaluated not according to the amount of
talking that student does, but rather according to whether that student
contributes thoughtfully and constructively, based on a careful consideration
of the class readings. Obviously, students cannot contribute to class
discussion if they are absent; consequently, repeated unexcused absences will
be reflected in their participation grade.

**Each student will complete an original 12-15 pp. research paper exploring an
Asian monument in its historical and current contexts. You may wish to
structure your paper around a specific theme, like those used to structure the
class sessions. Either choose one of the many monuments not included in the
syllabus, or select a theme, sources, and /or argument not covered in our
discussion of a monument included in the syllabus. Each student is expected to
meet with me to discuss potential topics during office hours on September 27.
A bibliography and prospectus are due in class on October 17, and the final
paper is due on the day of the final exam for this class. Each student will
give a structured fifteen minute talk based on their research during one of
the last two class sessions.

Please note that Professor Meyer-Fong does not accept papers by email!!
Extensions and makeups will be granted only with prior permission. In cases of
illness, emergency, or deadline conflicts, please request an extension from
the instructor as early as is feasible. Papers submitted late without prior
permission of the instructor will be penalized by half a grade per day.

**9/12 Introduction: Seeing the Sites**

**9/19 Yellow Mountain--Making a Place for National Identity and/or Literati
Sightseeing and its Modern Context**

> Reading:

>

> \--Joseph P. McDermott, "The Making of a Chinese Mountain, Huangshan:
Politics and Wealth in Chinese Art. _Asian Cultural Studies_ (Tokyo). v. 17.
(March 1989), 145-176.

>

> \--Selections from Richard Strassberg, _Inscribed Landscapes: Travel Writing
from Imperial China._ Berkeley: UC Press, 1994. 313-316, 403-410.

>

> \--Barry Sautman. "Myth of Descent, Racial Nationalism, and Ethnic
Minorities in the People's Republic of China." in Frank Dikotter, ed. _The
Construction of Racial Identities in China and Japan_. Honolulu: University of
Hawaii Press, 1997, pp. 75-95.

**9/26 The Great Wall: From Icon of Isolation to Emblem of Inclusion?**

> Reading:

>

> \--Andrew Waldron, _Great Wall of China._ (entire)

**10/3 The Forbidden City: The "Mysteries" of "The Great Within"**

> Reading:

>

> \--Nancy Shatzman Steinhardt, _Chinese Imperial City Planning,_ Honolulu:
University of Hawaii Press, 1990, pp. 1-28, 161-184.

>

> \--George N. Kates. _The Years that Were Fat_. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1988. Introduction (i-x), Chapter 1 (1-8), and Chapter 7 (104-125).

>

> Required Viewing: _The Last Emperor._ (Watch at least the first hour).

>

> Recommended Reading: Victor Segalen, _Rene Leys_ (on reserve).

**10/10 The Mao Mausoleum: Political Pilgrimage and the "Cult of
Personality"**

> Reading:

>

> \--Rudolf Wagner, "Reading the Chairman Mao Memorial Hall in Peking," from
Susan Naquin and Chun-fang Yu, _Pilgrims and Sacred Sites in China_. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1992, 378-423.

>

> \--Geremie Barme, _Shades of Mao: The Posthumous Cult of the Great Leader._
Armonk NY: ME Sharpe, 1996, pp. 3-74.

**10/17 Dunhuang: Syncretism and Spies in the Great Game**

> Reading:

>

> \--Peter Hopkirk, _Foreign Devils on the Silk Road_. (entire)

**10/24 The Taj Mahal: Tourists in Search of the Perfectly Picturesque**?

> Reading: --Agnes Rush Burr, _India: The Land that Lures,_ Boston: L.C. Page,
1929, 88-104.

>

> \--Wayne E. Bagley, "The Myth of the Taj Mahal and a New Theory of its
Symbolic Meaning." _The Art Bulletin._ LXI: 1 (March 1979) 2-35.

>

> \--Tim Edensor, _Tourists at the Taj: Performance and Meaning at a Symbolic
Site,_ New York: Routledge, 1998, 69-104.

**10/31 Khajuraho: Consuming the Exotic?**

> Reading:

>

> \--Relevant excerpts from _Fodor's_ and _Lonely Planet_

>

> \--Dennison Nash, "Tourism as a Form of Imperialism," from Valene Smith,
_Hosts and Guests: The Anthropology of Tourism,_ Philadelphia: UPenn Press,
1989, 37-52.

>

> \--Niloufer Ichaporia, "Tourism at Khajuraho, An Indian Enigma?" _The Annals
of Tourism Research,_ 10:1, (1983) 75-92.

>

> \--Som N. Chib, "Comment on Ichaporia's 'Tourism at Khajuraho, An Indian
Enigma?'" _The Annals of Tourism Research,_ 11:3 (1984) 507-511.

>

> \--Geoffrey Wall, "Khajuraho: Recollections and Ruminations: Comment on
Ichaporia's Paper," The Annals of Tourism Research, 11:3 (1984) 511-513.

**11/7 Ayodhya: A Contested Site**

> Reading:

>

> \--Peter Van Der Veer, "Ayodhya: Time and Place," _Gods on Earth._ London:
Athlone Press, 1995, 1-43.

>

> \--Partha Chatterjee,  "History and the Nationalization of Hinduism,"
_Social Research,_ 59:1 (Spring 1992), 111-149.

>

> \--Gyanendra Pandey,  "The Appeal of Hindu History," from Vasudha Dalmia and
Heinrich von Stietencron, _Representing Hinduism._ London: Sage Publications,
1995, 369 388.

**11/14 Borobudur: Preserving the Past in a Global Context**

> Reading:

>

> \--Dr. Soekmono, _Chandi Borobudur: A Monument of Mankind,_ Paris: The
UNESCO Press, 1976, 1-12, 42-51.

>

> Visit the Following Websites and be prepared to discuss:  
>  http://www.unesco.org/whc/heritage.htm  
>  http://www.cbs.ntu.edu.tw/FULLTEXT/JR-EPT/eiji.htm  
>  http://mcel.pacificu.edu/JAHC/JAHCIII1/ARTICLES/Greenhalgh/index.html

**11/21 Angkor Wat: Pillaging the Past in a Global Context**

> Reading:

>

> \--Ian Mabbett and David Chandler, _The Khmers._ Cambridge, MA: Blackwell,
1995, 1 12.

>

> \--Denise Heywood, "Report from Angkor Wat," _Orientations,_ 26:4 (April
1995), 71-73.

>

> \-- _One Hundred Missing Objects: Looting in Angkor,_ Paris: ICOM, 1993

>

> . --David Chandler,  "Seeing Red," _Facing the Cambodian Past._ Allen and
Unwin, 1996, 233-254.

**11/28 Nikko and Katsura: Decadence vs. Refinement in the Construction of a
"Japanese" Aesthetic**

> Reading:

>

> \--turn of the century descriptions of Nikko, from Ralph Adams Cram,
_Impressions of Japanese Architecture._ New York: The Japan Society, 1930
(reprint).

>

> \--Walter Gropius, "Architecture in Japan" in _Katsura: Tradition and
Creation in Japanese Architecture,_ New Haven: Yale University Press, 1960,
1-11.

>

> \--Kenzo Tange,  "Tradition and Creation in Japanese Architecture," in
_Katsura: Tradition and Creation in Japanese Architecture,_ New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1960, 14-36.

>

> \--Shoichi Inoue, "The False Image of Katsura Detached Palace," _Japan
Quarterly_ XXXIV: 2 (April-June 1987), 185-188.

**12/5 Student Presentations**

**12/12 Student Presentations  
  
**

[Back to Tobie Meyer-Fong](Tobie_Meyer-Fong.html)

[Back to History Faculty](Faculty_at_Hopkins.html)  
  
---  
  


