![](/~core/images/shield.gif)|

![Core Curriculum](/~core/images/core-curriculum-la.gif)  
  
---|---  
  
[Core Home](/~core/index.html)  
[Announcements](/~core/announce.html)(7/29/02)  
  
[Core Curriculum Guide for students who entered between September 1999 and
September 2002](/~core/redbook.html)  
  
[7-Course Core Requirement Form](/~core/7course_form.html)  
  
[Core Curriculum Guide for students who enter in September 2002 and
thereafter](/~core/redbook_2002.html)  
  
_Areas_  
  [Foreign Cultures](/~core/areas/01-02/fc/index.html)  
  [Historical Studies](/~core/areas/01-02/hs/index.html)  
  [Literature & Arts](/~core/areas/01-02/la/index.html)  
  [Moral Reasoning](/~core/areas/01-02/mr/index.html)  
  [Quantitative Reasoning](/~core/areas/01-02/qr/index.html)  
  [Science](/~core/areas/01-02/sci/index.html)  
  [Social Analysis](/~core/areas/01-02/sa/index.html)  

(C) 2000, President and Fellows  
of Harvard University

|  

[[Description](/~core/descriptions/00-01/la/index.html#lab46)] [[Course
Site](/~lab46/)]

## Literature & Arts B-46  
Art in the Wake of the Mongol Conquests: Genghis Khan and His Successors

### David Roxburgh

# ART IN THE WAKE OF THE MONGOL CONQUESTS

# GENGHIS KHAN AND HIS SUCCESSORS

**Lit. & Arts B-46**

M, W, [F], 12 (Spring, 2001), Sackler Lecture Hall

Professor David J. Roxburgh

Office:  Sackler 410

Office hours: Wednesday, 1-3

Tel.: (617) 496 1056

E-mail < roxburgh@fas.harvard.edu >

Head Teaching Fellow:  Emine Fetvaci

E-mail < efetvaci@fas.harvard.edu >

**Course Description:**

"... as terrifying as genocide and as dreadful as the plague" ( _Time_ , Dec.
31, 1999).  Is this characterization of Genghis Khan sufficient?  His legacy
entailed the destruction of social and cultural order.  Paradoxically, his
empire forged a dynamic relationship between nomadic and sedentary societies
and his successors fostered a climate of intense cultural activity in art and
architecture, producing complex fusions of artistic traditions between the
Middle East and China.  This course will focus on the art and architecture
produced from the thirteenth century on under Genghis Khan and his successors.
Genghis Khan and his Mongol horde traversed Eurasia to create an unprecedented
world empire, their most enduring legacy stamped on the lands of Iran and
Central Asia through their successors, the Ilkhanid and Timurid dynasties.
This imperial order established a new relationship between nomadic groups and
sedentary societies, an ongoing symbiosis of "steppe" and "sown."  To bolster
their claim to rule, successive leaders exploited the knowledge of indigenous
bureaucrats and craftsmen to execute their cultural program.  Regional
artistic traditions were manipulated and transformed into new hybrids that
could demonstrate the ruler's might and beneficence to the nomadic elite as
well as the multi-cultural urban populations under their control.  As complex
embodiments, these works reveal an evolving political structure and social
order.  The course examines how meanings are encoded through language, forms,
and aesthetic features, how they are made legible, and how they may function
as propaganda.

The environments from which the Mongols emerged and into which they came are
initially considered in terms of the heritage, culture, and ecology of the
Mongols and the peoples of the lands they conquered.  How did the Mongols
remember their nomadic past as the balance of their lives shifted, when they
became increasingly sedentarized?  Which symbolic elements could be easily
translated through the available forms of sedentary art and architecture?  In
subsequent lectures, key monuments of Ilkhanid and Timurid art and
architecture will provide a framework for analyzing different facets of the
process of cultural assimilation, the changing Mongol response--at first
hostile and then receptive--to the sedentarized cultures that they encountered
and then ruled.  Art and architecture were clearly understood as powerful
tools that could give shape to a new hegemony and maintain the socio-political
order.  What makes the Mongol context unique in this regard is the fusion of
previously distinct artistic traditions and identities (e.g. Perso-Islamicate,
Chinese, Turkic, Inner Asian) into new forms, often by the relocation of
groups of craftsmen from across the empire, and the interaction between
cultural outsiders and insiders across levels of nomadic and sedentary
societies.  Which ideological forms did the Mongols and their successors
choose to exploit that were alien to their own tradition (e.g., history,
biography, genealogy)?  In instances where translation was possible, for
example in courtly ceremonial and its settings, what interweavings occur
between permanent and impermanent architecture, both temporally and spatially?
How were the Mongols accommodated within Perso-Islamicate tradition?

Other themes and topics include the structures developed to propagate a new
aesthetic; systems of artistic production and patronage; the manipulation of
traditional forms and modes of expression; the role accorded to women in
Mongol society and the emergence of other patronage groups (religious and
bureaucratic elites, the military class); the range of motives for cultural
patronage and building; tensions between nomadic and sedentary groups; and
continuities and changes in attitude toward the Genghisid-Mongol legacy
throughout the period covered by the course.

Key readings are extracted from a wealth of recent literature in addition to
primary sources available in English translation.  No previous classes in
Islamic art and architecture or in Middle Eastern history and culture are
required.

**Readings:**

Readings should be completed before the lecture for which they are assigned.
Readings for the lecture course are in a sourcebook available at the Science
Center; some of the readings, marked with an asterisk *, are on reserve at
Lamont and Hilles libraries.  The sourcebook also contains some maps for
reference.  The only required book, David Morgan, _The Mongols_ , can be
purchased at The Coop.

Four films on the Mongols are also on reserve at Lamont.

**Course Web-Site:**

Copies of the syllabus, assignments, and term sheets from lectures may be
accessed through the course's web-site (
_http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~lab46/_ ).  A selection of slides from
lectures and readings will also be available through the web-site for mid-term
and final examination preparation.  Slide carousels will also be available for
exam review in Lamont and Hilles libraries.

**Requirements:**

Mid-term (15%) and final examinations (35%); short paper (spatial analysis of
a plan; no research required), 3 pp. (5%); long paper based on course
readings, lectures, and some additional research, 10-15 pp. (25%); and section
participation (20%).

The long paper will be selected from a list of possible topics.  The students
should discuss their ideas in consultation with their section leader and
submit an outline and thesis statement at the section in week 11.  The final
paper, accompanied by notes, a bibliography, and illustrations, will be due in
the reading period. ****

**  
**

**SYNOPSIS OF LECTURES**

|

**Week 1:**

|

**Jan 31**

|

**I.   Introduction and Overview**  
  
---|---|---  
  |   |  
  
**Week 2:**

|

**Feb 5**

|

**I.   Images of Genghis Khan and Tamerlane from Then until Now**  
  
  |   |  
  |

**Feb. 7**

|

**II.   Genghis Khan and the Mongol Imperium**  
  
  |   |  
  
**Week 3:**

|

**Feb. 12**

|

**I.   Pre-Mongol Artistic Traditions of Iran and Central **  
  
**Asia**

|    |  
  
**Feb. 14**

|    |

**II.   Pre-Mongol Artistic Traditions of the Steppes**  
  
**Section**

|

**Landscapes of Empire: Steppe and Sown**

|  
  |   |  
  
**Week 4:**

|

**Feb. 21**

|

**I.   The Silk Roads**  
  
  |

**Feb. 23**

|

**II.   Textiles in Exchange and Use**  
  
**Section**

|

**Nomadic Arts, Ethnography and Material Culture**

|  
  |   |  
  
**Week 5:**

|

**Feb. 26**

|

**I.   Architecture of Mongol Persia**  
  
  |

**Feb. 28**

|

**II.   Art of Mongol Persia**  
  
**Section**

|

**The Role of the Patron (Short paper due)**

|  
  |   |  
  
**Week 6:**

|

**March 5**

|

**I.   The Art of the Book: Rashid al-Din's Universal History**  
  
  |

**March 7**

|

**II.   The Great Mongol "Book of Kings"**  
  
**Section**

|

**Review session for Mid-Term exam**

|  
  |   |  
  
**Week 7:**

|

**March 12**

|

**I.   Tamerlane's Cities: Samarkand and Shahr-i Sabz**  
  
  |

**March 14**

|

**II. Midterm**  
  
**Section**

|

**Image and Ideology (Study of paintings in Sackler Museum)**

|  
  |   |  
  
**Week 8:**

|

**March 19**

|

**I. Tamerlane 's Tents and Palaces**  
  
  |

**March 21**

|

**II. Funerary Architecture: Sultans and Saints**  
  
**Section**

|

**Analyzing Timurid Architecture**

|  
  |   |  
  
**Week 9:**

|

**April 2**

|

**I.   New Allegiances: Shahrukh's Cultural Program**  
  
**April 4**

|    |

**II.   Forging Genealogies in History and Biography**  
  
**Section**

|

**Constructing Images of Self**

|  
  |   |  
  
**Week 10:**

|

**April 9**

|

**I.   The Timurid Artistic Workshop**  
  
  |

**April 11**

|

**II.   The Timurid Visual Idiom**  
  
**Section**

|

**Workshop Practices**

|  
  |   |  
  
**Week 11:**

|

**April 16**

|

**I.   On the Margins of Empire: China and Central Asia**  
  
  |

**April 18**

|

**II.   Muhammad Siyah Qalam's Nomads and Demons**  
  
**Section**

|

**" Chinoiserie" (Outline of long paper due)**

|  
  |   |  
  
**Week 12:**

|

**April 23**

|

**I.   Rival Courts: The Dissemination of an Ideal**  
  
**April 25**

|    |

**II.   The Expanded Field of Architecture**  
  
**Section**

|

**Social Structure and Patronage**

|  
  |   |  
  
**Week 13:**

|

**April 30**

|

**I.   Courtly Culture under Sultan Husayn, the Last **  
  
**Timurid Ruler**

|    |  
  
May 2

|

II.  Conclusion: The Turco-Mongol Legacy

|  
  
**Section**

|

**Review session for final exam (Long paper due in Reading Period)**

|  
**  
**

##  LECTURES AND READINGS

**Week 1:**

|

**I**

|

**Introduction and Overview**  
  
---|---|---  
  |   |  
  |

**Readings:**

|  
  |

David Morgan, _The Mongols_ , pp. 32-174 (chaps. 2-6)

|  
  |   |  
  
**Week 2:**

|

**I**

|

**Images of Genghis Khan and Tamerlane from Then until Now**  
  
  |   |  
  |

**II**

|

**Genghis Khan and the Mongol Imperium**  
  
  |   |  
  |

**Readings:**

|  
  |

Morgan, _The Mongols_ , pp. 175-98 (chap. 7)

|  
  |

J. J. Saunders, "Matthew Paris and the Mongols," 17 pp. (sourcebook)

|  
  |   |  
  
**Week 3:**

|

**I**

|

**Pre-Mongol Artistic Traditions of Iran and Central Asia**  
  
  |   |  
  |

**II**

|

**Pre-Mongol Artistic Traditions of the Steppes**  
  
  |

**Section:**

|

**Landscapes of Empire: Steppe and Sown**  
  
  |   |  
  |

**Readings:**

|  
  |

* Adam Kessler, "The Mongol Era and the Yuan Dynasty," 23 pp.

|  
  |

Joseph Fletcher, "The Mongols: Ecological and Social Perspectives," 40 pp.
(sourcebook)

|  
  |   |  
  |

**Recommended:**

|  
  |

* Robert Irwin, "The Emergence of the Islamic World System 1000-1500," pp. 32-61, in _The Cambridge Illustrated History of the Islamic World_ , ed. Francis Robinson

|  
  |   |  
  |   |  
  
**Week 4:**

|

**I**

|

**The Silk Roads**  
  
  |

**II**

|

**Textiles in Exchange and Use**  
  
  |

**Section:**

|

**Nomadic Arts, Ethnography and Material Culture**  
  
  |   |  
  |

**Readings:**

|  
  |

Thomas Allsen, _Commodity and Exchange in the Mongol Empire_ , chaps. 1, 2,
and 4 (sourcebook)

|  
  |   |  
  |

Veronica Gervers, "Felt in Eurasia," 7 pp. (sourcebook)

|  
  |

Morris Rossabi, "The Silk Trade in China and Central Asia," 13 pp.
(sourcebook)

|  
  |   |  
  
**Week 5:**

|

**I**

|

**Architecture of Mongol Persia**  
  
  |

**II**

|

**Art of Mongol Persia**  
  
  |

**Section:**

|

**The Role of the Patron (Short paper due)**  
  
  |   |  
  |

**Readings:**

|  
  |

* Sheila Blair and Jonathan Bloom, _Art and Architecture of Islam 1250-1800_ , pp. 5-35 (chaps. 2-3) (sourcebook and on reserve)

|  
  |

Blair, "Patterns of Patronage and Production in Ilkhanid Iran: The Case of
Rashid al-Din," 21 pp. (sourcebook)

|  
  |

Blair, "The Mongol Capital of Sultaniyya: The Imperial," 13 pp. (sourcebook)

|  
  |

* Charles Melville, "The Itineraries of Sultan Oljeitu, 1304-16," 16 pp.

|  
  |   |  
  
**Week 6:**

|

**I**

|

**The Art of the Book: Rashid al-Din's Universal History**  
  
  |   |  
  |

**II**

|

**The Great Mongol "Book of Kings"**  
  
  |

**Section:**

|

**Review session for Mid-Term exam**  
  
  |   |  
  |

**Readings:**

|  
  |

* Blair, _Compendium of Chronicles_ , pp. 12-15, 60-90, 114-16 (sourcebook and on reserve)

|  
  |

* Oleg Grabar and Sheila Blair, _Epic Images and Contemporary History_ , pp. 1-55

|  
  |   |  
  
**Week 7:**

|

**I**

|

**Tamerlane's Cities: Samarkand and Shahr-i Sabz**  
  
  |

**II**

|

**Mid-Term**  
  
  |

**Section:**

|

**Image and Ideology (Study of paintings in Sackler Museum)**  
  
  |   |  
  |

**Readings:**

|  
  |

Beatrice Forbes Manz, "The Legacy of Timur," 20 pp. (sourcebook)

|  
  |

Manz, "Tamerlane and the Symbolism of Sovereignty," 18 pp. (sourcebook)

|  
  |

Lisa Golombek, "Tamerlane, Scourge of God," 31 pp. (sourcebook)

|  
  |   |  
  
**Week 8:**

|

**I**

|

**Tamerlane 's Tents and Palaces**  
  
  |

**II**

|

**Funerary Architecture: Sultans and Saints**  
  
  |

**Section:**

|

**Analyzing Timurid Architecture**  
  
  |   |  
  |

**Readings:**

|  
  |

Roy Gonzalez de Clavijo, _Embassy to Tamerlane, 1403-1406_ , chaps. 12-13
(sourcebook)

|  
  |

Bernard O'Kane, "From Tents to Pavilions: Royal Mobility and Persian Palace
Design," 20 pp. (sourcebook)

|  
  |

Golombek, "The _Paysage_ as Funerary Imagery in the Timurid Period, " 12 pp.
(sourcebook)

|  
  |

Roya Marefat, "Timurid Women: Patronage and Power," 21 pp. (sourcebook) ****

|  
  |   |  
  
**Week 9:**

|

**I**

|

**New Allegiances: Shahrukh's Cultural Program**  
  
  |

**II**

|

**Forging Genealogies in History and Biography**  
  
  |

**Section:**

|

**Constructing Images of Self**  
  
  |   |  
  |

**Readings:**

|  
  |

* Thomas W. Lentz and Glenn D. Lowry, _Timur and the Princely Vision_ , pp. 67-157 (chap. 2)

|  
  |   |  
  |

Eleanor Sims, "Ibrahim-Sultan's Illustrated _Zafarnama_ of 1436 and Its Impact
in the Muslim East, " 12 pp. (sourcebook)

|  
  |

Anon., "Synoptic Account of the House of Timur," 10 pp. (sourcebook) ****

|  
  |   |  
  
**Week 10:**

|

**I**

|

**The Timurid Artistic Workshop**  
  
  |

**II**

|

**The Timurid Visual Idiom**  
  
  |

**Section:**

|

**Workshop Practices**  
  
  |   |  
  |

**Readings:**

|  
  |

Anon., _Arzadasht_ , 5 pp. (sourcebook)

|  
  |

Golombek, "Discourses of an Imaginary Arts Council in Fifteenth-Century Iran,"
17 pp. (sourcebook)

|  
  |

* Lentz and Lowry, _Timur and the Princely Vision_ , pp. 159-237 (chap. 3) __

|  
  |   |  
  
**Week 11:**

|

**I**

|

**On the Margins of Empire: China and Central Asia**  
  
  |

**II**

|

**Muhammad Siyah Qalam's Nomads and Demons**  
  
  |

**Section:**

|

**" Chinoiserie" (Outline of long paper due)**  
  
  |   |  
  |

**Readings:**

|  
  |

Yolanda Crowe, "Some Timurid Designs and Their Far Eastern Connections," 11
pp. (sourcebook)

|  
  |

Priscilla Soucek, "The New York Public Library _Makhzan al-Asrar_ and Its
Importance, " 22 pp. (sourcebook)

|  
  |

Nancy Shatzman Steinhardt, "Siyah Qalem and Gong Kai:  An Istanbul Album

|  
  |

Painter and a Chinese painter of the Mongolian Period," 13pp. (sourcebook)

|  
  |

Michael Rogers, "Siyah Qalam," 7 pp. (sourcebook)

|  
  |   |  
  
**Week 12:**

|

**I**

|

**Rival Courts: The Dissemination of an Ideal**  
  
  |

**II**

|

**The Expanded Field of Architecture**  
  
  |

**Section:**

|

**Social Structure and Patronage**  
  
  |   |  
  |

**Readings:**

|  
  |

* Lisa Golombek and Donald Wilber, _Timurid Architecture in Iran and Turan_ , vol. 1, pp. 44-69 (chap. 3) [sourcebook and on reserve]

|  
  |

Maria Eva Subtelny, "Socioeconomic Bases of Cultural Patronage under the Later
Timurids," 27 pp. (sourcebook)

|  
  |   |  
  
**Week 13:**

|

**I**

|

**Courtly Culture under Sultan Husayn, the Last Timurid Ruler**  
  
  |

II

|

Conclusion: The Turco-Mongol Legacy  
  
  |

**Section:**

|

**Review session for final exam   (Long paper due in Reading Period)**  
  
  |   |  
  |

**Readings:**

|  
  |

* Lentz and Lowry, _Timur and the Princely Vision_ , pp. 239-301 (chaps. 4 and 5)

|  
  |

Subtelny, "Scenes from the Literary Life of Timurid Herat," 19 pp.
(sourcebook)

|  
  
**Required Books**

David Morgan, _The Mongols_ (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, reprint 1990)

Sourcebook, available at the Science Center

**Educational Films**

_Mongols: Storm from the East_ , Films for the Humanities, Inc, 1994

4 parts:

> 1\. "Birth of an Empire" (50 mins.)

>

> 2\. "World Conquerors" (50 mins.)  
>  3\. "Tartar Crusaders" (50 mins.)  
>  4\. "The Last Khan of Khans" (50 mins.)



