![](/~fc17/images/dot.gif)

|

|  [![Harvard University,
fas](../images/harvard_shield_72.gif)](http://www.fas.harvard.edu)  
_Fall 2001_     |  
---|---  
  
![](../images/exams.gif)  
  
![](/~fc17/images/dot.gif)

|

* * *  
  
![](/~fc17/images/dot.gif)

|

** **

**

## Foreign Cultures 17**

**_Practice Questions for the Mid-term Examination_**

FORMAT OF EXAM: You will be asked to choose 5 ID's from a list of 10. This
section of the exam will constitute 40% of your grade. The other 60% are
derived from an essay. Again you will be able to select a question from a
choice of three or four. All questions and IDs will be taken from the list
below.

1) As a bright  Harvard student who is knowledgeable of Islamic societies, you
are asked to chair a panel on the dialogue of religions organized by Islamic,
Christian and Jewish groups. You want to do a good job by making an
introductory speech on the common characteristics and shared history of these
three monotheistic religions. Which elements will you emphasize relying on
your knowledge of Islam and the other faiths? Try to assume that there will be
students who might  harbor stereotypes about each other. In order to
facilitate a constructive basis for dialogue, what kind of historical events
and examples will you underline to dispel some of the prejudices you think
Jewish and Christian students might have about Islam.

2) Is Islam intrinsically hostile to change and creativity, as it is assumed
by many in the Muslim and non-Muslim world? Validate your argument with
references to specific social practices, the various regimes, institutions and
events drawn fom the  history of the Middle East (622 onwards). What kind of
changes occurred in these formative years of Islam, and what kind of trends
within Islam controlled/hastened the forces of change and assimilation?

3) In general, how would you characterize the Muslim treatment of other
religious communities in territories under their rule? What scriptural bases
and/or political and economic exigencies informed these policies? Support your
answer with specific examples from Middle Eastern history.

4) What were the main reasons behind the rapid expansion of the early Islamic
rule into a large geography extending from Spain to Central Asia in a very
short period of time? (632-711 and beyond)  How was this sudden spread
regulated, how were conquered peoples integrated, how were novel customs
synthesized with Qur'anic precepts?  (allude to religious minorities, Shariah,
Sufism, the nature of the early Empires)

5) Discuss the external and domestic factors which may account for the decline
of Ottoman Empire that you have encountered in your readings and lectures.
Which do you find most convincing, and which ones you find least compelling?
Did the Ottoman elites and leaders perceive the portents of decline
themselves? If so, what did they try to do to avert it?

6) Imagine you were a scholar traveling through the central lands of the
Ottoman State in the sixteenth century. You are interested in the political,
social and ethnic framework of states and are analytical in your reflections.
Write an newspaper article or a diary entry to introduce us to the Ottoman
State. You may be creative but base your account on concrete facts.

7) You are asked to teach world history to secondary school students one
semester, and you are determined to adopt a non-Eurocentric world view, giving
balanced attention to non-Western civilizations in your narration. How would
you situate Islamic history in your framework of world history? How would you
narrate the relations between Islamic and European histories from Muhammad of
Mecca to Napoleon Bonaparte?

  

8) "I went to the Kaaba of Mecca. [God] was not there. I asked about him from
Avicenna the philosopher. He was beyond the range of Avicenna . . I looked
into my own heart. In that, his place, I saw him. He was in no other place"  
 (Jallaladdin Rumi)

"The result is that the supreme ruler and he who posseses the science that
encompasses the intellligibles with certain demonstrative knowledge belong to
the elect. The rest are the vulgar and the multitude...These things are
philosophy when they are in the soul of the legislator. They are religion when
they are in the souls of the multitude."  
(al-Farabi, medieval Islamic philosopher)  


"The majority of men, I maintain, are dominated by a high opinion of their own
skills / especially the perfection of their intellects for distinguishing true
from false and sure guidance from misleading  
suggestion.  It is therefore necessary, I maintain, to shut the gate so as to
keep the general public from reading the books" (al-Ghazali).  
"If a man knows not his own soul, which is nearest to him, what is the use of
his claiming to know others?"  
(al-Ghazzali, "The Alchemy of Happiness).

What kind of "Islams" do the above quotes illustrate?  What philosophical
influences do you detect? What do they tell us about the variant currents in
medieval Islamic civilization?  


9) "Both [Christianity and Islam] have their characteristic failings. Muslims
have preached social order, but their most obvious failure, to the outside
observer, has lain in their recurrent inability to establish sound,
enlightened government.  Christians have preached love, and one of the most
striking feature of their history, at least before recent times, has been
their inability to maintain fellowship even within the Church"  
(Marshall Hodgson)

Which Muslim and Christian precedents may Hodgson be alluding to in his
critique? (Also think of the Cox article)  Which symbols and institutions have
Muslim regimes and thinkers utilized to sustain unity and how successful were
they?  
When did social order elude Muslim empires and what role did religion play?  


10)Imagine you are an official historian of the Ottoman dynasty writing the
conclusion of your chronicle of the Empire on the eve of WWI. You are
exploring what went wrong in the past (roughly) one and a half centuries since
major reforms were initiated in the Empire. To begin with, you realize that
there are two widely-held responses on the question: Conservatives; the
modernizing reforms are ultimately responsible for the weakening and crumbling
of the Empire which will fall apart and split; Reformists: it was rather the
reforms which prolonged the life of the Empire for another century and a half.
By comparing these two views develop your own view through discussing major
reform measures and their effects on the continuity/demise of the Empire.

  
    


**_IDs_

**Ahl al-Kitab**

**Shi'a**

**Sunna**

**Sunni**

**'Ali**

**al-Rashidun/ "The Rightly Guided Caliphs"**

**Caliph**

**Qur'an**

**Hadith**

**Shari'ah**

**The Five Pillars**

**jihad**

**(closing the door of) ijtihad**

**Sufism**

**'ulema**

**Umayyads**

**Convivencia**

**Abbasids**

**Harun al-Rashid**

**Ummah**

  


**Mamluks**

**Crusades**

**Mongols**

**al-Ghazali**

**Jalal al-Din Mevlana Rumi**

**Tahtawi**

**Jamal ad-din Afghani**

**Muhammad Abduh**

**Wahhabi**

  


**Gazi**

**Millet**

**Reaya**

**Askeri**

**Sheikh ul-Islam**

**Madrasa**

  


**Janissaries**

**qadi**

**Sultan**

**Grand Vezir**

**Mehmet the Conqueror**

**Suleyman the Magnificent**

**Timar**

**Devshirme**

  


**Treaty of Karlovitz**

**1453**

**Second Siege of Vienna**

  


**Muhammad Ali**

**Selim III.**

**Mahmud II.**

**nizam-i cedid**

**Tanzimat**

**Abdulhamid II**

**Tel-el Kabir**

**Urabi Revolt**

**Suez Canal**

**Ottoman Public Debt Administration**

  


![](dot.gif)  
---|---  
![](dot.gif) |

* * *

[[Home Page](~fc17)] [[Teaching Staff](/~fc17/instructors)]
[[Sections](/~fc17/section)] [[Lectures](/~fc17/lecture)]
[[Syllabus](/~fc17/syllabus)] [[Handouts](/~fc17/handouts)]
[[Assignments](/~fc17/assignments)] [[Internet Resources](/~fc17/links)]
[[Class Discussion](/~fc17/discussion)]

* * *

http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~fc17/syllabus/index.html_  
last modified:  06/28/99

Copyright (C) The President and Fellows of Harvard College

* * *

