### HISTORY 182  
WORLD HISTORY FROM 1500 TO THE PRESENT



**Objectives:** This course examines the major issues that have shaped the
human experience from 1500 to the present. The major theme of the course is
the gradual integration of the various regions of the world into a single
interconnected world system, beginning with the expansion of Europe in the
sixteenth century. We will also attempt to examine the internal dynamics of
change in the various parts of this growing world system. Each week, we will
study one major set of issues and analyze their global significance. Our goal
is to assimilate factual knowledge about the human experience over the past
500 years within the interpretive framework of the modern world system.



**Readings:** The following books are required for the course and are
available at SBX, Long's, and the University Bookstore:

  * Peter N. Stearns, Michael Adas, and Stuart B. Schwartz, _World Civilizations: The Global Experience_ , 2nd ed., Vol. II (Bedford Books, 1996) 
  * Jonathan D. Spence, _Emperor of China: Self-Portrait of K'ang-Hsi_ (Vintage Books/Random House, 1974) 
  * Olaudah Equiano, _The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano_ , ed. Robert J. Allison (Bedford Books, 1995) 
  * Carlo Levi, _Christ Stopped at Eboli_ , trans. Frances Frenaye (Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1947, 1963) 



**Written assignments:**

1) A _midterm examination_ , to be held in class. The exam will consist of
several identifications, a map quiz, and one essay question; it will cover
**all** material presented during the first half of the course, including
readings, lectures, and material introduced during recitations.

2) A _short paper_ of about five pages comparing the protagonists (main
characters or figures) of **two** of the three non-textbook books. The paper
assignment is given later in this syllabus.

3) A _comprehensive final examination_. The exam will consist of several
identifications and two essay questions; it will cover **all** material
presented in the course.



**Recitations:** Attendance at recitations is mandatory. During these
sessions, you will discuss books and other materials that complement the
lecture topics; you will also have an opportunity to review material covered
in lectures and readings. Keep notes on these discussions; they will help you
in writing your exams and preparing your short papers. Absences from
recitations will be excused only in the case of illness or emergency; you must
present an official written excuse to your T.A.



**Grading:**

    
    
    attendance and participation in recitations         15%
    midterm                                             25%
    short paper                                         30%
    final                                               30%
    



**Make-up examinations and late work:** Make-up examinations will be given
only in cases of compelling necessity and on presentation of an official
written excuse. It is the student's responsibility to take the make-up exam at
the time and place that the instructor specifies. Unless you are a graduating
senior, you are responsible for taking the final examination at the appointed
time; do not ask for exceptional treatment.

Late work will be downgraded by one letter grade for each day it is late. Work
that is four or more days late will not be accepted. Incompletes will not be
given except in dire circumstances, which **must** be documented.



**CYBERTIP!** You are invited to visit the History Dept.'s home page on the
World Wide Web at http://www.history.ohio-state.edu/. There you will find
"Tips for History Students," information about the department's courses and
programs, career information, and links to other interesting material.



**Schedule**

**Week 1:** The Beginnings of Global Integration, 1500-1650

_Readings:_ Stearns, pp. 1-17, 33-72

Jan. 6 Introduction: The world in 1500

Jan. 8 Europe and the invasion of America

Jan. 10 The Russian expansion

**Week 2:** The growth and consolidation of the world system

Stearns, pp. 75-147

Jan. 13 Spanish America and silver

Jan. 15 The Ottoman Empire and the Red Sea coffee trade

Jan. 17 Africa and the Atlantic slave trade

_Recitations:_ Simulation:  "Silver and Spice"

**Week 3:** The rise of a global economy, 1650-1750

Stearns, pp. 17-30, 149-171; Spence, entire

Jan. 20 _Martin Luther King Day - no class_

Jan. 22 The struggle in the European core

Jan. 24 The limits of European power: China

**Week 4:** The age of revolutions, 1750-1850

Stearns, pp. 173-186

Suggested: Begin reading Equiano.

Jan. 27 The age of "Atlantic revolutions"

Jan. 29 Political upheavals in the peripheries: Spanish America

Jan. 31 _Midterm examination_

**Week 5:** The renewal of European imperialism, 1750-1850

Stearns, pp. 186-201, 209-233; Equiano, entire

Feb. 3 The Industrial Revolution and socioeconomic ferment

Feb. 5 The era of free trade imperialism

Feb. 7 European imperialism in Asia

**Week 6:** The world and the new industrial order, 1850-1930

Stearns, pp. 201-205, 235-285

Feb. 10 Transportation, communication, migration, and global unity

Feb. 12 Dependent peripheries: Latin America

Feb. 14 The crisis of the Ottoman Empire

**Week 7:** New crises in the world system, 1850-1930

Stearns, pp. 205-207, 287-329

Feb. 17 Industrialization in Japan

Feb. 19 Global war and revolution

Feb. 21 The war in the peripheries: The Arab revolt

_Recitations:_ _The Great War and the Shaping of the 20th Century_ videos

**Week 8:** The world system in depression, 1930-1945

Stearns, pp. 329-341; Levi, entire

Feb. 24 Global depression in the core

Feb. 26 Global depression in the peripheries

Feb. 28 The second global war

**Week 9:** The rise and decline of the bipolar world, 1945-1996

Stearns, pp. 341-399, 497-521

Mar. 3 The rise of bipolarity

Mar. 5 The epic of the Chinese revolution

Mar. 7 The collapse of the Soviet Union and the rise of a multipolar world

_Short papers due_

**Week 10:** A new Third World order?

Stearns, pp. 401-495, 523-537

Mar. 10 Decolonization

Mar. 12 The rise of the Pacific Rim

Mar. 14 The postcolonial Third World: The case of Egypt

**Mar. 17** _Final examination, 11:30 a.m._





* * *

**CULTURE, CIVILIZATION, AND THE MODERN WORLD SYSTEM:  
TERMS AND DEFINITIONS**

**CULTURE**

  1. **High culture** \- the artistic, literary, or religious/sacred traditions of any society 
  2. **Popular culture** \- the sum total not just of high culture but of all the ideas and artifacts that tie a society together, from household utensils to perceptions of the afterlife 



A **CIVILIZATION** , or **macroculture** , is defined by a number of
characteristics:

  1. It produces an economic surplus of regional produce and/or luxury goods. 
  2. It has economically specialized roles with considerable social stratification into priests, bureaucrats, farmers, merchants, etc. 
  3. It has defined urban centers that serve as integrative forces in matters of trade, politics, and high culture. 
  4. It has a government with military and administrative powers. 
  5. It is often (though not always) characterized by a widely accepted religious tradition with a well-defined social role for the clergy or religious leaders. 

We often associate a civilization with expansion into and long-term domination
of other regions and cultures, as in the case of the Roman Empire in the
Mediterranean or the Mongols in Central Asia.



The modern **WORLD SYSTEM** , as defined by Immanuel Wallerstein, is an
economically interconnected network of countries and regions, dominated by a
**core** consisting of the western European states and, after World War II,
the United States.

  1. The modern world system was centered in **Europe** and began its period of expansion after 1492. 
  2. By the twentieth century, this world system had incorporated or controlled much of the globe, vastly increasing global political, social, and above all economic interrelatedness. 
  3. The world system was connected fundamentally by **economic** ties, especially through world trade, and it included many different cultures. 



**What is the HIERARCHY OF ZONES in the modern world system?**

  1. The **core** , or **center** , zones are the dominant regions in the world system. They were centered in Europe until the end of World War II. They are the most economically "advanced" zones, with diverse economies, usually characterized by considerable industrial strength, advanced technologies, and large accumulations of wealth. 
  2. **Intermediate** , or **semiperipheral** , zones are less dominant regions; we might think of them as the "backyard" of the core zones. Often, semiperipheries act as "conveyor belts" transferring resources from regions producing raw materials to the more technologically advanced core zones. They are often regions or nation-states that are rising to core status or falling from that position. Great Britain after World War II and Russia in the nineteenth century would be examples. 
  3. **Peripheries** , or **satellites** , are parts of the world system, but they are much less prominent than the core or semiperipheral zones. They are usually the colonies of the core powers or their dependencies (regions or nations that are politically independent but economically subordinate, such as many Latin American and African nations). 
  4. **External arenas** are those parts of the world outside the sway of the world system. They can be **(a)** powerful international actors, such as the former Communist states or pre-modern empires, **(b)** relatively isolated or underdeveloped regions, such as the poorest nations in Africa, or **(c)** frontier zones that are largely unsettled and undeveloped. These last two types of external arenas decreased rapidly in number during the second half of the twentieth century. 



**What general rules define the world system?**

  1. It has vaguely defined **boundaries** that change, but usually slowly over time. 
  2. A key **city** or **cluster of cities** (by the twentieth century) are the important centers of exchange and contact. 
  3. **Strong states** operate in the core zones, although the dominant type of political structure varies over time, from monarchy or an elite-controlled system to pluralistic democracy. 
  4. It has a **multicultural** union of different peoples. 
  5. There is an **uneven distribution of wealth through the hierarchy of zones** ; that is, there are rich and poor regions or nations, depending on how they were incorporated into the world system. 
  6. There is also an **uneven distribution of wealth within the various zones** of the world system; that is, there is socioeconomic stratification within regions or nations. 
  7. **Trade and war** are the most important factors in the expansion of the world system, but trade is by far the more important of these two factors. 
  8. It tends to have a **single dominant core power** , but there are times when more than one core power exists. 
  9. All of these rules apply **only at the macro level** , that is, at the level of international trade, politics, and diplomacy. Many peasants, in particular, at the bottom of their societies' socioeconomic hierarchies, are completely removed from these trends. They eke out a living much as their ancestors did before being incorporated into the world system, whether they live in core or peripheral zones. Over time, the world system does penetrate even this subsistence sector. This is a slow process, however, that is barely perceptible except over relatively long periods. 





* * *

**SHORT PAPER ASSIGNMENT**

Write a paper of about five pages (1250 words) comparing the protagonists
(main characters or figures) of **two** of the following books:

***** Jonathan D. Spence, _Emperor of China: Self-Portrait of K'ang-Hsi_

***** Olaudah Equiano, _The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah
Equiano

_

***** Carlo Levi, _Christ Stopped at Eboli_.

In your paper, you should address the following questions, although these are
not the **only** questions you may address:

**1)** How do the times and places in which the characters live differ? By
what large-scale political, economic, and social forces of world history are
these times and places affected?

**2)** How do the characters relate to these global forces? Do they, for
example, set in motion or control these forces? Do they take advantage of
them? Are they victimized by them?

**3)** How do the characters' cultures affect the manner in which they react
to these global forces? Consider  "culture" in the broadest possible sense:
education, religion, interaction with other cultures, material wealth, even
diet and disease.

**4)** Which character, if either, is a more convincing world historical
figure? You should, of course, explain your conception of a world historical
figure.

**TIPS FOR WRITING:

1)** Do not simply answer the above questions in order. Craft a coherent
argument supported by specific examples from the books, textbook, lectures,
and recitation discussions.

**2)** **Essay format:** Your essay should consist of coherent paragraphs,
each beginning with a thesis sentence. You should present your argument in the
first paragraph or two, build your case in the succeeding paragraphs, and
clinch your case in a concluding paragraph or two. You may, however, choose a
less conventional format, such as an imaginary dialogue between the two
characters. If you take this tack, however, you must be sure to make the same
points that you would make in a formal essay.

**3)** **Quotations:** Do not quote from the books or from other sources
simply for the sake of quoting. Choose the passages you quote, if any,
carefully, and position them in your essay so that they clearly support the
points you are making without interrupting the flow of your argument.

Your essay should be **typed, double-spaced**. Do not try to manipulate the
length of your paper by using abnormally large or small type or margins. Your
paper is due **in class Monday, March 7**. Please turn your paper in **to your
T.A.** Late papers will be downgraded one letter grade for each day they are
late.

