
    **THE  MIDDLE  EAST:  CULTURAL  CONTINUITIES
                   Professors R. Holod and B. Spooner
                 e-mail addresses: rholod@sas.upenn.edu,  
    		spooner@pardis.sas.upenn.edu       
    		   Anth 232/Arth 218, Fall 96
                            Thursdays 3-6 pm,
                               Jaffe 113
    
    
    THIS SYLLABUS IS UPDATED WEEKLY ON THE WEB.
    
    Brief Description
     
    The history of the Middle East is similar to other parts of the world
    in the number of natural disasters and large scale movements of
    population that it includes, and in its changing internal
    configurations and external links.  Despite these disruptions the
    research records, in archaeology, history and ethnography, show
    abundant examples of cultural continuity. These continuities are
    particularly interesting in the areas of landuse, technology, symbols
    and patterns of organization and rationalization.  This interdisciplinary
    course sets out the evidence for some of these continuities and explores
    arguments for explaining them and assessing their significance.
     
     
    Schedule of Classes
     
    1. (9.5.96)
    Introduction: overview of the course, followed by a historical and
    cultural outline of the region.
    Readings: familiarize yourself (using something like the Times Atlas
    of the World) with the Middle East as a whole, from Morocco to Central
    Asia, paying special attention to national boundaries, major rivers and
    major areas of mountain and desert.
     
    2. (9.12.96)
    Theme One: Landscape
    Classification and description of typical landscapes and related
    human activities, including discussion of technology, settlement patterns,
    selection of resources, agriculture, pastoralism, etc.--what has changed
    and how.
     
    "Readings: 
    Watson ch. 1, 
    Adams, Land Behind, intro, maps and commentaries and conclusions
    Beck, read in the book to understand migration
    Spooner, "Desert" Encyclopedia Iranica (xerox)
    Ruggles, in Journal of Garden History, 1994, (xerox) note change in reading
    Grabar, et al., pp. 1-14 and 148-172
    King and Cameron, pp 1-16, 231-270
    Subtelny, M., in Studia Iranica (xerox)"
     
     
    3. (9.19.96)
    Landscape: discussion
    
    Note:  Please begin the readings for THEME TWO:  COMMUNITY prior to 
    lecture 4.
    
    4. (9.26.96)
    Theme Two: Community.
    The spatial and the social dimensions of organization in various
    types of community; continuities of kinship and other institutions.
     
    Readings: Barth, Beck, Peters, Spooner, King and Cameron, Campo, Goitein
     
     
    5. (10.3.96)
    Community: discussion
     
     
    6. (10.10.96)
    Theme Three: Administration
    Political forms; kingship and the primus inter pares; leadership and
    varieties of loyalty.
     
    Readings: Mottahedeh, Meeker, Frye, Crone, Deweese, Mc Chesney
     
     
    7. (10.17.96)
    Administration: discussion
     
     
    8. (10.24.96)
    Theme Four: Commerce
    Communications and transportation; long-distance vs local; the
    historical succession of luxury commodities; the Silk Route and the
    Monsoon.
     
    Readings: 
    Issawi; Bulliet, review main aarguments of monograph, read 
    introduction and concluding chapter; Goitein, look at the volumes I, II 
    and III, particularly at the parts that deal with trade, Udovitch, 
    pp. 29-58, 315-345, 595-685, Spooner, Le Strange, read up on one region 
    which interests you the most, Ibn Fadlan, Holod.
    
    If you are interested in pursuing the question of commerce and investment 
    look at Udovitch, A., Partnership and Profit in Medieval Islam, 
    Princeton, 1970. 
    
    If you want to pursue the activities of Armenian 
    merchants during the Safavid period, a good place to begin is the 
    Cambridge History of Iran, volume VI on the timurids and Safavids.
     
     
    9. (10.31.96)
    Commerce: discussion. 
     
    10. (11.7.96)
    Theme Five: Pilgrimage
    Cultural patterns of liminal and liminoid experience (Turner's
    terminology); local, regional, and inter-regional; and continuities in
    symbolization. 
    Readings: Turner, Betteridge, Hedayat, Blair, Golombek
    *Should be read for Thursday, Nov. 7th.
    1. Pilgrimages as social processes by Victor Turner, in his book called:  
    _Dramas, Fields and Metaphors_.
    2. His coauthored book on pilgrimage (not the whole thing, but get an 
    idea of what he is doing with the subject).
    3. The Search for Mercy in Sadeq Hedayat, an Anthology. 
    4. Betteridge, Ziarat:  look through first volume and read the 
    description of individual shrines in Shiraz.
    5. McChesney, Waqf in Central Asia
    6. Blair and Golombek, (on Michelle Rein's carrell in the Fine Arts 
    Library) familiarize yourselves with the layout and chronology of the 
    shrines. 
    
    11. (11.14.96)
     
    Pilgrimage: discussion
     
     
    12. (11.28.96)
    Continuity and change
    Review and discussion of the factors underlying the various patterns
    of continuity and change studied in the course.
     
    Readings: Hodgson
     
    13. (12.4.96)
    Concluding discussions
    Readings: Lewis, Hourani, Mottahedeh.
     
     
     
    REQUIREMENTS
     
    For each of the five themes students should prepare a three-page
    response to the lectures and readings.  This response should be
    brought to the second class devoted to the particular theme.
     
    Each page should be identified with the student's name, and the
    theme.  All written work will be read by both instructors and returned with
    comments.  Students should write a revised and extended (10 page) version
    on one of the themes at the end of the semester.
     
    Grades will be based on your cumulative progress in understanding
    the subject matter of the course, as shown in class discussions
    (25%), the weekly written work (35%), and the final essay (40%).
     
    Students who miss a class (for any reason), may do additional reading,
    chosen from the bibliography below.  No more than two classes may be made
    up in this way.  Grades may be adversely affected if more than two classes
    are missed, or if students
    fall more than one week behind in the written work.
      
     
     
     
    BIBLIOGRAPHY
     
    Robert McC. Adams, 1965, Heartland of Cities, Chicago, 54-94, 130-70
    and175-228.
     
    R. Mc. Adams, 1965, Land behind Baghdad, Chicago.
    
    Sheila  Blair, 1986, The Ilkhanid Shrine in Natanz, Iran, Cambridge, MA.
     
    Peter Brown, Authority and the Sacred: Aspects of the Christianisation of
    the Roman World, Cambridge, 1995
    
    Patricia Crone, 1989, Pre-Industrial Societies, Oxford: Blackwell's.
    Franz Cumont
    
    Encyclopaedia of Islam
    
    Ibn Fadlan,_Eaters of the Dead_, trans. Michael Crichton, 1974(?)
     
    FAO Handbooks on camels, goats, irrigation
     
    W. B.Fisher, 1971, The Middle East,  a physical, social and regional
    geography, London
     
    R.N.Frye, 1976, The Heritage of Persia, London.
     
    R.N.Frye, 1995, The Heritage of Central Asia, Princeton.
     
    Oleg  Grabar, Renata Holod, James Knudstad and William Trousdale, 1978,
    City in the Desert, Cambridge, Mass., 1-14,29-39,
    70-84,90-97,98-109,148-173
     
    Shlomo Goitein, 1967-1993, Mediterranean Society, I-VI, Berkeley-Los 
    Angeles.
     
    Lisa Golombek, 1969,The Timurid Shrine at Gazur Gah, Toronto.
     
    Hastings Encyclopaedia 
    
    Sadeq Hedayat, 1979, The search for mercy, in Sadeq Hedayat: and
    Anthology, Boulder: Westview Press, pp. 53-62.
    
    Holod, "Luxury Arts of the Caliphal Period," Al-Aandalus, ed. Jerrilyn 
    Dodds, New York, pp. 41-47.
    
    Albert Hourani (2), 1970.  The Islamic City in the light of Recent
    Research.  The Islamic City, Oxford: Bruno Cassirer, pp. 9-24.
    
    Charles Issawi, 1982, An Economic History of the Middle East and North
    Africa, New York: Columbia University Press.
     
    Gregory Alan Johnson, 1973, Local Exchange and Early State Development in
    Souhtwestern Iran , Ann Arbor.
     
    Hugh Kennedy, 1985," From Polis to Madina: urban change in late antique and
    early Islamic Syria," Past and Present 106
     
    G.  R.  D.  King and Avril Cameron, eds,  1994, The Byzantine and Islamic
    Near East II, Land Use and Settlement Patterns, Princeton.
     
    S. N. Kramer, "Kingship in Sumer and Akkad: The Ideal King,"
    163-76.
     
    M. T. Larsen, "The City and Its King. On the Old Assyrian Notion
    of Kingship," pp. 285-301.
    
    Guy Le Strange,_Lands of the Eastern Caliphate_, ed. 1976.
    
    Robert McChesney, 1991,Waqf in Central Asia:  Four Hundred Years in th
    History of a Muslim Shrine, 1480-1889, Princeton.
     
    Michael Meeker, 1979, Literature and Violence in Northern Arabia, Cambridge.
    
    Michael Meeker, 1980, The twilight of a South Asian heroic age: a
    rereadin Barth's study of Swat, Man 15/4:682-701.
    
    P. Michalowski, "Orality and Literacy and Early Mesopotamian Literature," 
    pp.227-45. 
      
    Andre Miquel 1967-1988,La geographie humaine du monde musulman, Paris
     
    Michael Morony, 1984, Iraq after the Muslim Conquest., Princeton
     
    Roy Mottahedeh, 1980, Loyalty and Leadership in Early Islamic Society,
    Princeton.
    
    Roy Mottahedeh, The Mantle of the Prophet.
    
    Peters, Emrys, 1960, The Proliferation of Segments..., Journal of the 
    Royal Anthropological Institute 90:29-53.
    
    Peters, Emrys, 1963, Aspects of Rank and Status among Muslims in a
    Lebanese Village.  Mediterranean Countrymen, edited J. Pitt-Rivers, 
    Paris: Mouton.
     
    A. P. G. Poyck, 1962 Farm Studies in Iraq, Wageningen.
     
    Andre Raymond, 1984, The Great Arab Cities in the 16th-18th
    Centuries, New York: NYU Press.
     
    Michael Roaf,1990, Cultural Atlas of Mesopotamia, New York.
      
    Michael Rowton, 1973 "Urban Autonomy in a Nomadic Environment,"
    Journal of Near Eastern Studies 32: 201-15.
     
    Michael Rowton, 1973 "Autonomy and Nomadism in Western Asia,"
    Orientalis 42: 247-58.
     
    Michael Rowton, 1974, "Enclosed Nomadism," Journal of the Economic and
    Social History of the Orient 17 : 1-30
     
    Michael Rowton, 1976, "Dimorphic Structure and the Tribal Elite,"
    Studia Instituti Anthropos 28: 219-57.
     
    Michael Rowton,1977,  "Dimorphic Structure and the Parasocial
    Element,"Journal of Near Eastern Studies 36: 181-98.
     
    Michael Rowton, 1980, "Pastoralism and the Periphery in Evolutionary
    Perspective,"  M.-T. Barrelet, ed., L'Archeologie de l'Iraq
    Paris, .29-301.
     
    Michael Rowton, 1981, "Economic and Social Factors in Ancient
    Nomadism," in Jorge Silva Castillo, ed., Nomads and Sedentary
    Peoples, Mexico City, pp. 25-36.
     
    Michael Rowton, 1982, "War, Trade and the Emerging Power Center",
    H.-J. Nissen and J. Renger, eds., Mesopotamien u. seine Nachbarn,
    Berlin, pp. 187-194.
     
    D.F. Ruggles "Vision and Power at the Qala Bani Hammad in Islamic North 
    africa, "Journal of Garden History, 1994.  pp. 28-41.
     
    Stephen Sandford,  1983, Management of Pastoral Development in the Third
    World, Chichester.
     
    Brian Spooner, 1987, "Insiders and outsiders in Baluchistan:
    Western and indigenous perspectives on ecology and development,"
    Lands at risk in the Third World: local-level perspectives,
    edited by Peter D. Little and Michael M. Horowitz, with A. Endre
    Nyerges, Boulder: Westview Press, 58-68.
     
    Brian Spooner, 1972, The Iranian Deserts. Population Growth:
    Anthropological Implications, Cambridge: MIT Press, 245-268.
       
    Brian Spooner, 1973, The Cultural Ecology of Pastoral Nomads.
    Addison Wesley modular publication in Anthropology, no. 45.
     
    Brian Spooner, 1974, "City and river in Iran" Studies on Isfahan, R. Holod,
    ed., Iranian Studies , 681-713.
     
    Brian Spooner and H.S.Mann (eds.), 1982, Desertification and
    Development, London:
    
    Subtelny, M.E., "Mirak-i Sayyid Ghiyas and the Timurid Tradition of 
    Landscape Architecture,"
    Studia Iranica, 1995, pp. 19-60.
    
    Victor Turner and Edith Turner, Image and Pilgrimage in Christian
    Culture: Anthropological Perspectives, New York: Columbia University 
    Press, 1978.
     
    J. P. Singh Uberoi, 1971, "Men, Women and Property in Northern
    Afghanistan, "India and Contemporary Islam, edited by S. T.
    Lokhandwalla. Simla: Indian Institute of Advanced Study, 398-
    416.
     
    Udovitch, L. Abraham, 1981, The Islamic Middle East 700-1900:  Studies in
    economic and social history, Princeton.
     
    Timothy Ware, 1963, The Orthodox Church, Penguin Books, 26-
    111. 
     
    Andrew Watson, 1983, Agricultural Innovation in the Early
    Islamic World:  the diffusion of crop and framing techniques,700-1000,
    Cambridge.
     
    W. Montgomery Watt ,1961,  Islam and the Integration of
    Society,  Chicago.
    
    Harvey Weiss, ed., The Origins of Cities in Dry-Farming Syria and 
    Mesopotamia in the 3rd Millennium B.C. (Gilford Conn: Four Quarters
    Publ. Co., 1986).
    
    Melinda Zeder, Feeding Cities (Washington, D.C., 1991).  "Of Kings
    and Shepherds: Specialized Animal Economy in Ur III Mesopotamia," in
    Stein and Rothman, Chiefdoms and Earlly States in the Near East
    (Madison, Wisc., 1994).
    
     
    Devin Deweese, 1994, Islamisation and native religion in the Golden Horde:
    Bata Tekles and conversion to Islam, College Park.
     
    Michael Zohary, 1973, Geo-Botanical Foundations of the Middle East, 
    Stuttgart.
     
    (This course is designed to fulfill the History and Tradition
    requirement. It will also be taught for graduate students as
    ANTH632 and ARTH 618 with a separate discussion period and different
    requirements.)**
     
    

