![](/~core/images/shield.gif)|

![Core Curriculum](/~core/images/core-curriculum-la.gif)  
  
---|---  
  
[Core Home](/~core/index.html)  
[Announcements](/~core/announce.html)(6/27/02)  
  
[Core Curriculum Guide for students who entered between September 1999 and
September 2002](/~core/redbook.html)  
  
[Core Curriculum Guide for students who enter in September 2002 and
thereafter](/~core/redbook_2002.html)  
  
_Areas_  
  [Foreign Cultures](/~core/areas/01-02/fc/index.html)  
  [Historical Studies](/~core/areas/01-02/hs/index.html)  
  [Literature & Arts](/~core/areas/01-02/la/index.html)  
  [Moral Reasoning](/~core/areas/01-02/mr/index.html)  
  [Quantitative Reasoning](/~core/areas/01-02/qr/index.html)  
  [Science](/~core/areas/01-02/sci/index.html)  
  [Social Analysis](/~core/areas/01-02/sa/index.html)  

(C) 2000, President and Fellows  
of Harvard University

|  

[[Description](/~core/descriptions/00-01/la/index.html#lac43)] [[Course
Site](/~lac43/)]

## Literature & Arts C-43  
The Medieval Court

### Eckehard Simon

Harvard University

**Program on the Core Curriculum**

** **

**Literature and Arts C-43**

**The Medieval Court: European Literature and Court Culture 1100-1250**

** **

**Spring Semester 2001**

** **

**Syllabus**

** **

Tuesdays, Thursdays 10:00-11:00 in Fong Auditorium, Boylston Hall (110), plus
one weekly section meeting on Thursdays afternoons (2:00, 3:00) or Friday
mornings (10:00, 11:00).



Professor Eckehard Simon, Department of Germanic Languages and Literatures,
Barker Center 345. Ph.: 496-9359, e-mail:
[simon2@fas.harvard.edu](mailto:simon2@fas.harvard.edu)

Office Hours: Tuesdays 2:00-3:00, Thursdays 4:00-5:00 in Barker Center 345.



Head Section Instructor: Grant Henley, Barker Center 345, e-mail:
[henley@fas.harvard.edu](mailto:henley@fas.harvard.edu)

Office Hour: Tuesdays, Thursdays 11:00-11:30 (right after lecture) in Barker
Center 345.



Section Instructors: Patrick Fortmann, Robert Lemon, Ewa Slojka.



# Program

We study the European court culture of the High Middle Ages as one of the
"creative moments" of Western civilization. This was the time when the newly
powerful and prosperous feudal (better: lordship) aristocracy of France,
England and Germany started building stone castles. Fighters on horseback
began to refer themselves as knights, trained and - sometimes - fought by a
new code of conduct called chivalry. The ruling nobles saw to it that the
literature and art they sponsored celebrated what they considered the ideal
way of life. Less mindful of church authority, courtly society created the
vernacular lyric (troubadour songs), the short story (Marie de France), and
the novel, then called romance (King Arthur's knights, Tristan and Isolde, the
Grail quest). Much of its literature is informed by the ideal of love "as an
ennobling experience" - courtly or romantic love - a radically new idea then,
but one with a bright future. Court literature transformed the old feudal
warrior ( _Song of Roland_ ) into the gentleman knight, still brave but
morally refined, whose poetry and aventurous quest are prompted by his love
for a woman.

            How this literature relates to and reflects the life people led is one of the questions we ask. We also explore its otherness, how it differs from our way of looking at experience and commemorating the past. In recreating the historical scene, the culture of court society, the lectures (about half illustrated) provide information that enables you to read and understand courtly literature "in the context of place and time," the approach this subfield of Literature and Arts takes. You gain additional help from reading articles from the _Dictionary of the Middle Ages_ in your Sourcebook. The Sourcebook also contains descriptions of the 488 slides you see in this course, which you are able to prescreen and review on the course web site carousel (see below). The images enable you to become visually literate about the architectural and artistic heritage of court culture. The literature will speak to you most directly about how people of that age lived and what they thought and felt. You study the literature mainly in your section. I expect you to participate actively in section discussions and look forward to teaching each section at least once.



# Requirements

Aside from attending section faithfully, you are required to write papers of
two kinds. In three short papers (3-4 pages), you study and interpret literary
texts: a character or episode in _The Song of Roland_ , a troubadour poem, a
character or episode from one of Chretien's romances. The Assignment Schedule
below lists the due dates. In these papers you also practice writing clear
expository prose. Toward the end of the semester, you do library research on
and write a term paper of 10-15 pages, for which we give you a set of topics.
You may devise your own topic, but your section instructor must approve it in
advance. The Sourcebook contains a lecture topic bibliography and the
textbooks list scholarly publications about our authors and their works. You
must hand in your term paper to your section instructor on May 10 (Th) or 11
(F), 2001, the day your section meets for review. I do not give extensions or
authorize section instructors to grant extensions. Please note this now. We
will return the graded term paper to you at or before the Final Examination.
Papers written for Literature and Arts C-43 may not be submitted for credit in
another course. I look forward to reading the best papers written in each
section.

            You are also required to take a Midterm Examination (Tuesday, March 20, 10:00-11:00 in Fong Auditorium) and a Final Examination, tentatively scheduled for May 23. Some questions on both exams ask you to comment on the slides we have studied, identifying and explaining significant features. Because sections only work when everyone has done the reading, your instructor may give - should the need manifest itself - unannounced short factual quizzes.

            Your section leader holds office hours, advises you on your papers, and helps with assignments. Details in the weekly lecture hand-outs.

            In computing the final grade, we will weigh your work as follows:

section participation 25%, term paper 25%, final exam 25%, short papers 15%,
midterm exam 10%.

            Because this course requires regular preparation and active participation, it may not be taken PASS/FAIL.



# Textbooks

You are required to read the following books, which you should buy at The
Coop's Textbook Department _during the first two weeks of classes_. The Coop
is stocking fewer copies than we requested, but is willing to re-order quickly
on demand.



1)    _The Song of Roland_ , translated with an introduction and notes by Glyn
S. Burgess. Penguin Books, 1990. ISBN 0-14-044532-3.

2)    The Lais of _Marie de France_ , translated with an introduction and
notes by Glyn S. Burgess and Keith Busby. Penguin Books, 2nd ed. 1999. ISBN
0-14-044759-8.

3)    _Chr etien_ de Troyes, Arthurian _Romances_ , translated with an
introduction and notes by William W. Kibler. Penguin Books, 1991. ISBN
0-14-044521-8.

4)    _Gottfried_ von Strassburg, _Tristan_ , translated [бн.] with the
surviving fragments of the _Tristan_ of Thomas, with an introduction by A. T.
Hatto. Penguin Books, 1967. ISBN 0-14-044098-4.

5)    _Wolfram_ von Eschenbach, _Parzival_ , translated by A. T. Hatto.
Penguin Books, 1980. ISBN 0-14-044361-4.

6)    _Sourcebook._ It contains slide descriptions, poems and songs assigned,
articles and maps from the _Dictionary of the Middle Ages_ , the list of
reserve books, and the course bibliography. Please buy your copy right away at
the Core Sourcebook outlet, Science Center basement. The Sourcebook office
produces copies on demand.

_ _

# Reserve Shelves

A few copies of the required books plus reference works are being held on
reserve shelves in Lamont and Hilles Libraries. The _Sourcebook_ contains a
list.



# Web Site

The web site for Literature and Arts C-43 contains this syllabus, an eMailbag,
and a slide Carousel. I will archive my answers to course-related questions
you ask via e-mail on the eMailbag page in order to make them accessible to
all students. The Carousel contains copies of the slides and their captions.
This allows you to look at the slides before I talk about them in class, to
review them for the exams, and draw on them for your term paper. The address
of the web site is:
[http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~lac43](http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~lac43).
Under user name, type in lac43. I will write the password on the blackboard.



# Lecture and Assignment Schedule

# Febr. 1

**Introduction:** The Rise of Court Culture, Building Castles



**1 st week, Febr. 6, 8**

**The Castle** (cont.)

Building castles, locations, major types

Slide Lecture 1: Castles (First Half). Please read captions in _Sourcebook_
(or on web site carousel) before lecture and bring book to class in order to
annotate captions.

**Assignment:** in _Sourcebook_ , read 'Feudalism', 'Castles and
Fortifications.'



**2 nd week, Febr. 13, 15 **(Sections begin meeting Thursday or Friday)

**The Castle** (cont.)

Design, main structures, siege warfare

Slide Lecture 2: Castles (Second Half), 3: Laying Siege to the Castle

**The Song of Roland** : A feudal warrior and crusading epic

**Assignment:** for section discussion, read _The Song of Roland_ , plus the
Introduction, pp. 7-25.



**3 rd week, Febr. 20, 23**

# The First Troubadour

Life and times of Count William VII of Poitou, his court at Poitiers

"Courtly love", women and marriage in courtly society

**Assignment:** in _Sourcebook,_ read the poems of Guillem IX (=William VII)
and Bernart de Ventadorn;  'France: 987-1223.' Short paper (3-4 pages) on _The
Song of Roland_ due in section (Febr. 23 or 24).



** **

** **

**4 th week, Febr. 27, March 1**

# Life at Castle and Court

Furnishings, running the household, daily routines, clothing and food

Minstrelsy and other pastimes

Slide Lecture 4: Life at Castle and Court

**Assignment:** in _Sourcebook_ , read the poems of Bertran de Born, Conon de
Bethune, Richard Coeur de Lion; 'England: Norman-Angevin.'



**5 th week, March 6, 8**

# Eleanor of Aquitaine, The Court of Henry II

Eleanor and Henry: two notable lives

Literature and letters at the court of Eleanor and Henry

# Marie de France

Slide Lecture 5: Angevin Castles. Henry, Eleanor, and Family.

**Assignment:** read _Marie de France_ , including the Introduction, pp. 7-36.
In _Sourcebook_ , read 'Eleanor of Aquitaine', 'Henry II of England', 'Thomas
Becket', 'Richard I The Lionhearted', 'John, King of England', 'Philip II
Augustus', The Major Courts: Genealogy. Short paper on troubadour or trouvere
poem due in section (March 8 or 9).



**6 th week, March 13, 15**

# King Arthur and the Rise of Romance

Arthur in history and legend

# Chretien de Troyes

Inventing the novel

**Assignment:** in _Chr etien, Romances_, read _Erec and Enide_ and Kibler 's
Introduction, pp. 1-22.



**7 th week, March 20, 22**

# The Knight and Chivalry

Becoming a knight, training, the knighting ceremony, armor, weapons, warfare

Slide Lecture 6: Knights and Chivalry

**Assignment for Section:** in _Chr etien, Romances_, read _Yvain, The Knight
with the Lion_.

**March 20, Tuesday, 10:00-11:00 a.m.: Midterm Examination in Fong
Auditorium.**



March 24-April 1: Spring Recess



**8 th week, April 3, 5**

# The Knightly Life

Tournaments, hunting and hawking

William Marshall, knight-errant

Notes on _Lancelot_

Slide Lecture 7: Tournaments and Hunting

**Assignment:** in _Chr etien, Romances_, read _Lancelot_.



**9 th week, April 10, 12**

# Court Art

Jewelry, tapestries, murals

Slide Lectures 8, 9

# The Tristan Romance

Gottfried of Strasbourg

**Assignment:** _Gottfried_ 's _Tristan_.



**10 th week, April 17, 19**

# A Minstrel's Life: Walther von der Vogelweide

Political poetry, love lyrics

A court song recital (tape)

**Assignment:** in _Sourcebook_ , read Walther's poems, Five Court Songs,
'Germany: 1138-1254.' Short paper on Chretien's _Erec_ , _Yvain_ or _Lancelot_
due in section (April 19 or 20).



**11 th week, April 24, 26**

# Literature at Court: The "Otherness" of Medieval Literature

Patronage, the poet and his audience, reciting and reading

Poets at the Court of Thuringia

Notes on Chretien's _Perceval_

Slide Lecture 10: The Court of Thuringia

**Assignment:** in _Chr etien, Romances_, read _Perceval_ , and _Wolfram_ 's
_Parzival_ , chapters 1-8. In _Sourcebook_ , Parzival Genealogy.



**12 th week, May 1, 3**

# Wolfram von Eschenbach

Learned knight and master romancer, his grail romance _Parzival_

Slide Lecture 11: Wolfram von Eschenbach

**Conclusion: The Heritage of Court Culture** ****

**Assignment:** _Wolfram_ 's _Parzival_ , chapters 9-16



**Reading Period:** May 5-16. Sections meet for review on Thursday, May 10 or
Friday, May 11. **Term papers due in section.** **No extensions.** Please fill
out CUE Course Guide evaluation forms.



**Final Examination (tentative):** Wednesday, May 23, at   in
.



