Painting and Book Illumination of the Islamic World

A survey of painting and book illustration in the Islamic world between the
8th and the 20th centuries. Topics may include thematic subjects, styles and
schools, as well as intensive discussion of some masters. Visits to museums
are planned.

Tentative Reading List:

O.F. Akimushkin/ A.A. Ivanov, "The Art of Illumination", in: The Art of the
Book in Central Asia, 14th - 16th Centuries, ed. B. Gray (Boulder, London and
Paris, 1979), 35-57

T.W. Arnold, Painting in Islam (Oxford, 1928)

L. Binyon, J.V.S. Wilkinson and B. Gray, Persian Miniature Painting (Oxford,
1933/New York, 1971)

R. Ettinghausen, "Manuscript Illumination", in: Survey of Persian Art, ed.
A.U. Pope and Ph. Ackerman, vol. iv (London, 1939), p. 1937-74

R. Ettinghausen, Arab Painting, (Geneva, 1962)

Syllabus

(Week 1) Introduction: Subject-matter and scope/survey of the course

The Concept of Figural Representation in Pre-Islamic Western Asia

(Week 2) The Problem of Aniconism and Iconoclasm in Islamic Art Reading: T.
Allen, "Aniconism and Figural Representation", in: Five Essays on Islamic Art,
Sebastopol 1988, 17-37. P. Crone, "Islam, Judeo-Christianity and Byzantine
Iconoclasm", in: Jerusalem Studies in Arabic and Islam 2 (1980), 59-95 O.
Grabar, "Islam and Iconoclasm", in: Iconoclasm, ed. A. Bryer and J. Herrin,
45-52

Painting the Word of God: Koranic Calligraphy

(Week 3) Kings and Dancing Girls: The Subject-Matter of Wall Paintings in
Umayyad Palaces Reading: R. Hillenbrand, "The "Dolce Vita" in the Umayyad
Palaces of Syria and Jordan" in: Ars Islamica

Symbols From the Past: Style and Semantics of Wall Paintings in 9th Century
Iraq Reading: tba

(Week 4) The Eastern and Central Mediterranean: Fatimid and Norman Painting in
Egypt and Sicily Readings: R. Ettinghausen, "Painting in the Fatimid Period: A
Reconstruction", in: Ars Islamica IX (1942), pp. 112-24 E.J. Grube, "Fostat
Fragments" in: Islamic Painting and the Art of the Book, ed. B.W. Robinson,
The Keir Collection II (London, 1976), p. 126-32

Illustrations to Greek and Roman Scientific Literature of the Schools of
Baghdad and Northern Syria in the early 13th Century Reading: H. Buchthal,
"Early Islamic Miniatures From Baghdad", in: Art of the Mediterranean World,
AD 100 to 1400 (Washington, DC, 1983), pp. 18-31 O. Grabar, The Illustrations
of the Maqamat, Chicago 1984

(Week 5) Waterclocks and Robots: The Book On the Knowledge of Ingenious
Mechanical Devices by Muhammad al-Jazari (1206 A.D.)

Readings: K. Weitzmann, "The Greek Sources of Islamic Scientific
Illustrations", in: Archaeologia Orientalia in Memoriam Ernst Herzfeld, ed.
G.C. Miles (Locust Valley, 1952, pp. 244-66.

Heros and Lovers: the Iranian Epic "Shahname", The Book of Kings M.S. Simpson,
The Illustration of an Epic: The Earliest Shahnama Manuscripts (New York,
1979) O. Grabar and Sh. Blair, Epic Images and Contemporary History: The
Illustrations of the Great Mongol Shahname (Chicago and London, 1980)

(Week 6) The Metropolitan Style at the Mongol Court Reading: D. Barrett,
Persian Painting of the Fourteenth Century (London, 1952) D.T. Rice, The World
History of Rashid al-Din: A Study of the Royal Asiatic Society Manuscript
(London, 1978)

Midterm

(Week 7) Painting During the Reign of Tamerlane Reading: tba

Demons and Derwishes of Central Asiatic Desert: The Master Mu¨²ammad "Black
Pen" (Siyah Qalam) Reading: B. Gray, ed., The Arts of the Book in Central
Asia, 14th-16th Centuries, (London and Paris, 1979) B. Gray, "Siyah Qalam",
in: Islamic Art I (1981), pp. 62-65

(Week 8) The Athens of the East: Early Timurid Painting and the School of
Herat, Afghanistan Reading: T.W. Lentz, Painting at Herat under Baysunghur ibn
Shahrukh (Cambridge, 1985) E.J. Grube, ed., The Classical Style in Islamic
Painting: The Early School of Herat and its Impact on Islamic Painting of the
Later 15th, the 16th and 17th Centuries (New York, 1968

Case Study in Late Timurid Painting: Master Behzad Reading: tba

(Week 9) The Safavid School of Tabriz Reading: E.J. Grube, ed., The Classical
Style in Islamic Painting: The Early School of Heratand its Impact on Islamic
Painting of the Later 15th, the 16th and 17th Centuries (New York, 1968) S.C.
Welch, ed., Wonders of the Age: Masterpieces of Early Safavid Painting,
1501-1576, (Cambridge, 1979-80)

Case Study: Reza Abbasi and the Mature Safavid Style at Isfahan Reading: Sh.
Canby, "Age and Time in the Work of Riza" in: Persian Masters. Five Centuries
of Persian Painting, 71-84 Qazi Ahmad ibn Mir Munshi, Gulistan-i honar (The
Rose Garden of Art), transl. By V. Minorsky as Calligraphers and Painters
(Washington, DC, 1959) S.C. Welch, Shah Abbas and the Arts of Isfahan, (New
York, 1974)

(Week 10) Saints, Prostitutes and the jeunesse d'or¨¦e: Eclectic Painting in
Safavid Isfahan Reading: tba

Rembrandt in Isfahan?!: The Safavid Adaption of European Painting Reading:
Ivanov, A., "The Life of Muhammad Zaman: A Reconsideration", in: Iran
17(1979), 65-70 Sims, E., "The European Print Sources of Paintings by the
Seventeenth-Century Persian Painter, Muhammad Zaman Ibn Haji Yusuf of Qum",
in: Le stampe e la diffusione delle immagini e degli stili, ed. H. Zerner,
Bologna 1983, 73-83

(Week 11) Crowns, Pearls and Long, Long Beards: The Heroic Image in Court
Painting Under the Qajars and Zand Dynasties (17th-18th Cent.) Reading: tba

Painting the Empiore: Ottoman Painting in the 16th and 17th Centuries Reading:
N. Atasoy and F. Cagman, Turkish Miniature Painting (Istanbul, 1974) E.G.
Sims, "The Turks and Illustrated Historical Text", in: Proceedings of the
Fifth International Congress of Turkish Art (Budapest, 1978), pp.247-72 R.
Milstein, Miniature Painting in Ottoman Baghdad (Costa Mesa, 1990)

(Week 12) Iran at the Ganges: Early Mughal Painting in India(16th-17th
Centuries) Reading: M. Beach, Early Mughal Painting, (Cambridge, 1987) Wh.
Thackston, The Baburname. Memoirs of Babur, Prince and Emperor, Cambridge 1994

The Emperor Divine: The Imperial Moghul Style in the Period from Jahangir to
Aurangzib (17th-18th Centuries) Reading: M. Beach and E. Koch, King of the
World. The Padshahnama (Washington, DC, 1997) M. Beach, The Grand Mogul:
Imperial Painting in India 1600-1700 (Williamstown, 1978)

(Week 13) Between a Glorious Past and Socialist Realism - The Dilemma of
Modern Painting in the Islamic World Reading: M. Brin, Peintres et sculpteurs
de l'Egypte contemporaine (Cairo, 1935) Institut du monde Arabe, M. Racim,
miniaturiste Algerien (Paris, 1992) A. Zeki, "Le passe et l'avenir de l'art
musulman" in: L'Egypte contemporaine XIII (1913), 1-21

Precepts:

Week 2: Precept: The Tradition of Painting in Pre-Islamic Iran

Week 3: Precept: Painting, Book-Illustration and Mosaics in Byzantium

Week 4: Precept: (Firestone Library) The Arabic Book: Materials, Bookbinding
Arnold, T.W./Grohmann, A., The Islamic Book: A Contribution to its Art and
History from the VII-XVIII Century, Leipzig 1929

Week 5: Precept: Qadi Ahmad's Treatise on Penmanship

Week 6: Precept: Theories on the Perception of Beauty in Islam: The Writings
of Ibn al-Haytham and al-Ghazzali

Week 8: Precept: The Western Gaze: Orientalist Painting in the 19th Century

Week 9: Precept: The Other Side: Rajput Painting in the Mughal Period

Week 10: Precept: Propaganda and Piety: Paintings and Posters From Iran, Iraq
and Palestine

Week 11: Precept: Album leaves in the Princeton Art Museum

Week 12: Precept: Illustrated manuscripts in Firestone Library

Week 13: Precept: Visit of the Philadelphia Art Museum or Metropolitan Museum
of Art, NY

  

