**WELLESLEY COLLEGE**

**Political Science 208**

**Politics of China**

**![](Images/mao1.jpg)![](Images/deng.jpg) ![](Images/jiangzm.jpg)**

**Fall 2001**

**Professor William A. Joseph  
****PNE 232, x2201  
Office Hours:  
T 2:15-4:00; W 9:30-12:00; Th 4:15-5:30  
and by appointment**

This course is an introduction to the modern political history and
contemporary political system of China. Topics include the fall of imperial
China, the origins, development, and victory of the Chinese Communist
revolution; the rule and legacy of Chairman Mao Zedong, with particular
emphasis on the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution; economic
reform, cultural opening, and political repression (especially the Tiananmen
crisis) in the era of Deng Xiaoping; and the prospects for post-Deng China.
Politics in Tibet, the Muslim areas of China, Hong Kong, and Taiwan will also
be considered. Although the focus of the course is on China's domestic
politics, close attention will be paid to the influence of international
factors on China's development and part the last sessions of the course will
look at China's role in the world in the late 20th century.

The written assignments for the course and their weights in the final grade
are as follows:

  * 2 take-home essay exams (7-10 pages) due Friday, October 12th and Friday, November 16th (25% each);
  * a final research paper (15-20 pages) (50%) due no later than January 18, 2002 **(January Option)**.

Active participation in class will be taken into account as a positive factor
when determining the course grade. _Please see the list of_[
_"Responsibilities and Expectations"_](../resp.html) _attached at the end of
this syllabus._

The following books (all paperback) are available for purchase in the
bookstore. They are also on reserve in the library.

  * Marc Blecher, CHINA AGAINST THE TIDES: RESTRUCTURING THROUGH REVOLUTION, RADICALISM AND REFORM.
  * Jung Chang, WILD SWANS: THREE DAUGHTERS OF CHINA.
  * Current History, CHINA (September 2001)
  * Suzanne Ogden, GLOBAL STUDIES: CHINA (9th ed.)
  * Peter J. Seybolt, THROWING THE EMPEROR FROM HIS HORSE: PORTRAIT OF A VILLAGE LEADER IN CHINA, 1923-1995

Video assignments are an important part of this course, so you should take
them just as seriously as the reading. The assigned videos are all on reserve
in the library; when possible, common showing times will be arranged.

There are several on-line assignments which can be accessed by clicking the
assignment link on the course syllabus posted on the instructor's homepage on
the Wellesley CWIS: <http://www.wellesley.edu/Polisci/wj/China/china.html> or
through the "Internet Assignments" folder in the course First Class
conference.

Students are also expected to keep up with current events in Chinned Taiwanby
reading China News Digest (CND), an on-line news service
([www.cnd.org/Global](http://www.cnd.org/)) or other sources (for some
suggestions, see ["China
Links"](http://www.wellesley.edu/Polisci/wj/China/chinalinks.html) on the
instructor's homepage. The first 10-15 minutes of class each Thursday will be
spent discussing interesting current events.

* * *

**COURSE SCHEDULE AND READING ASSIGNMENTS**

The schedule that follows is rather loosely structured in that specific dates
are not provided for each class session. I will try to tell you in class where
you should be in the reading; but basically you will be responsible for
setting an appropriate pace for the assignments. Items marked (R) are on
reserve in the library. Readings marked (ER) are on "electronic reserve"
printable format via the course conference on First Class. The readings are
listed in the order in which it is recommended that they be done.

**Sept. 6: Introduction to the Course**

**Sept. 10- Oct. 4: China's RevolutionS** ****

**Sept. 10-20 The Fall of the Imperial China**

  * Marc Blecher, CHINA AGAINST THE TIDES, ch. 1, pp. 9-16.
  * John E. Wills, "Confucius," in John E. Wills, MOUNTAIN OF FAME: PORTRAITS IN CHINESE HISTORY, pp. 11.-32. (ER)
  * Suisheng Zhao, "The Decline of the Chinese World Order," in Suisheng Zhao, POWER COMPETITION IN EAST ASIA, pp. 15-32. (ER)
  * [Digital China/Harvard, "The Opium War,"](http://cyber.harvard.edu/ChinaDragon/opium_frames.html) (Skim the site, beauty sure to read Commissioner Lin's Letter to Queen Victoria)
  * John E. Wills, "Hong Xiuquan: The Heavenly King" in John E. Wills, MOUNTAIN OF FAME, pp. 259-275. (ER)
  * Suzanne Ogden, GLOBAL STUDIES: CHINA, articles 5, 6, 8, 9, 19.
  * Video Assignment: "The Two Coasts of China" (1 hour) (R: _under "Pacific Century," v. 1)_

Recommended: Jonathan D. Spence & Annping Chin, THE CHINESE CENTURY: A
PHOTOGRAPHIC HISTORY OF THE LAST HUNDRED YEARS, ch. 1. (R)

**Sept. 24-Oct. 4: The Rise of the Chinese Communist Party  
**

> **Sept. 27: NO CLASS (YOM KIPPUR)-- Make-up to be scheduled**

  * Blecher, ch. 1, pp. 16-40.
  * Edgar Snow, "The Long March," Part 5, in RED STAR OVER CHINA. (ER)
  * Peter J. Seybolt, THROWING THE EMPEROR FROM HIS HORSE, Intro., ch. 1.
  * Jung Chang, WILD SWANS, chs. 1-7.
  * Mao Zedong (Mao Tsetung):
    * ["Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan"](Mao/hunan.html)
    * "[Be Concerned with the Well-being of the Masses"](Mao/wellbeing.html)
    * ["On Contradiction"](Mao/contrad.html) (parts I, II, VI, VI)
    * ["Some Questions Concerning Methods of Leadership"](Mao/methods.html)
    * ["What is Guerrilla Warfare?"](Mao/gw.html)
    * ["Serve the People"](Mao/serve.html)
    * ["The Foolish Old Man Who Removed the Mountains"](Mao/foolish.html)
  * Video Assignment: "China in Revolution" (2 hours) (R)
  * Internet Assignment: [Rent Collection Courtyard](http://www.unc.edu/courses/hist84/ChinaClaySculp/ChinaClaySculp.html) (James Hevia, University of North Carolina)

Recommended: Spence & Chin, THE CHINESE CENTURY, chs. 2-7. (R)

**Oct. 8: NO CLASS (FALL BREAK)**

**Oct. 11-Nov. 1: The Mao Era (1949-1976)**

**Oct. 11-15: Consolidation and Transformation (1949-57)**

  * Blecher, ch. 2, pp. 43-66
  * Seybolt, chs. 2-3.
  * Chang, chs. 8-11.
  * Mao Zedong:
    * ["Preserve the Style of Plain Living and Hard Struggle"](mao21.html)
    * ["On the People's Democratic Dictatorship"](mao22.html)
    * ["On the Question of Agricultural Cooperation," (Part I)](mao23.html)
    * ["On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People," (Parts I, II, VIII, IX, X)](mao24.html)

**Oct. 18-22: The Great Leap Forward...and Backward (1958-1965)**

  * Blecher, ch. 2, pp. 66-77.
  * Seybolt, THROWING THE EMPEROR, chs. 4-5.
  * Chang, WILD SWANS, chs. 12-14.

**Oct. 25-29: Mao's Last Stand: The Cultural Revolution (1966-1976)**

  * Blecher, ch. 2, pp. 77-87.
  * Seybolt, THROWING THE EMPEROR, ch. 6.
  * Chang, WILD SWANS, chs. 15-27.

Recommended video: "Wild Swans" (59 minutes) (R)

**Nov. 1: Evaluating Mao & Maoism**

  * Harry Harding, "The Legacy of Mao Zedong," in Harry Harding, CHINA'S SECOND REVOLUTION, pp. 11-39 (ER)
  * Li Zhisui, THE PRIVATE LIFE OF CHAIRMAN MAO (excerpts). (ER)
  * Video Assignment: "The Mao Years" (2 hours). (R)

Recommended: Spence & Chin, THE CHINESE CENTURY, chs. 8-10. (R)



**Nov. 5- Dec. 6: The Deng Era and Beyond (1977--present)**

**Nov. 5-8: Overview**

  * Blecher, ch. 3. 
  * Chang, WILD SWANS, ch. 28 and Epilogue
  * Deng Xiaoping:
    * ["Uphold the Four Cardinal Principles"](Deng/principles.htm) (excerpts)
    * ["Build Socialism with Chinese Characteristics"](Deng/Building.htm)
  * Video Assignment: "Tragedy at Tiananmen" (1 hour) (R)

Recommended: Spence & Chin, THE CHINESE CENTURY, chs. 11-12. (R)  
Recommended Video: ["The Gate of Heavenly
Peace"](http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/gate/) (3 hours) (R). [_(Click
here to visit PBS website for this
film.)_](http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/gate/)

**Nov. 12-19: Economic, Social , and Cultural Reform in China: How Much
Change!**

  * Blecher, chs. 5-7.
  * Seybolt, THROWING THE EMPEROR FROM HIS HORSE, chs. 7-10.
  * Current History, China (Sept. 2001), article by Thomas & Chen.
  * Ogden, articles 1, 10, 13, 14, 16, 17.
  * Video Assignment: "Born Under the Red Flag" (2 hours). (R)

**Nov. 26-29: Political Reform in China: How Much Change?**

  * Blecher, ch. 4, 8
  * Ogden, articles 3, 11, 12.
  * Current History, articles by Tanner, Wasserstrom, Polumbaum. 

**Dec. 3-6: Outer China, Greater China, and Beyond China**

  * Taiwan:
    * Ogden, pp. 50-75; articles 20-22.
  * Hong Kong
    * Ogden, pp. 76-99; articles 23-24.
    * Current History, article by Canning.
  * Tibet & Xinjiang
    * Ogden, articles 16-18.
    * Current History, article by Sautman.
  * China and the World
    * Ogden, pp. 42-47, articles 2, 7.
    * Current History, articles by Ahn, Bachman

**Dec. 10: Politics in China: Looking Back, Looking Ahead**

  * Blecher, ch. 9.
  * Ogden, article 4.

