### History 345.01  
History of East Asia to 1800



**Description:** This course is an introduction to the history of China and
Japan prior to the beginning of intensive interaction with Europe at the end
of the eighteenth century. It will emphasize social and cultural developments,
including religion, mythology, ethics and world views, as well as economic and
political institutions. About six weeks of class time will be devoted to China
and about five weeks to Japan. While traditional China and Japan were similar
in important ways, differences between the two were at least as significant
and both will be given attention.



**Objectives:** History 345.01 is conceived as a truly introductory course to
the history of the East Asian Region. As such, it can provide a strong
foundation for arts and sciences students, including history majors. It should
also serve the needs of students who intend to pursue a broad range of
professional courses of study, including (but not confined to) business,
education, engineering, law, or medicine. From the course students will
acquire a basic knowledge of Buddhism, Confucianism, Shinto, the history of
the major Chinese dynasties, and the evolution of feudal institutions in
Japan. They will become acquainted with the Chinese meritocratic tradition of
bureaucratic rule and the importance of military government administered by
samurai warriors in Japan. The course will also help students to understand
the enormous cultural and resource base of China and some of the factors which
later facilitated Japan's relatively early industrialization.



**Teaching Staff:** Within the Department of History, it is anticipated that
any of the current faculty who specialize in East Asian history may teach the
course in future. At the present time, this includes Professor James
Bartholomew, Professor Philip Brown, and Professor Christopher Reed.



**Course Format:** The course will adopt a lecture-discussion format with
appropriate audio-visual material (films, slides, transparencies, computer-
scanned images). It is anticipated that lectures and audio/visual material
will take up about three-quarters of class time and discussion about one-
quarter.



**Textbooks and Readings:** Students will be expected to purchase their own
copies of the following paperback books, which will be available at each of
the campus area bookstores:

  1. Conrad Schirokauer, _A Brief History of Chinese and Japanese Civilizations_ , Second Edition 
  2. Molly Coye & Jon Livingston, eds., _China Yesterday and Today_
  3. Ray F. Downs, ed., _Japan Yesterday and Today_
  4. Peter Duus, _Feudalism in Japan_ 



**Course Requirements And Grading:** There will be one midterm examination, a
paper assignment (5 to 7 pages), and a comprehensive final examination.
Students are responsible for attending class regularly and participating in
discussion of issues raised in the course. The course grade will be calculated
as follows:

    
    
         Midterm examination     25 percent
         Written assignment      25 percent
         Participation           10 percent
         Final examination       40 percent
    
    

The written assignment will not require additional research using materials
outside the required course readings; in that sense it is not a traditional
term paper. The assignment will focus instead on issues raised in the regular
course readings, especially on material presented in the two volumes of
documents. One example would be Japan's, "Closed Country Edict of 1636." Here
the student would be asked to analyze the document and briefly to discuss the
circumstances which led the Tokugawa shogunate to promulgate the edict. The
expected length would be about five to seven pages.



**Weekly Lecture Topics and Reading Assignments:**

**

Week One**_ _Ancient China

_

Introduction to the Course

Antiquity

Chou Feudalism

Discussion

**

Readings** : Schirokauer, Chap. 1; Coye & Livingston, pp. 25-41.



**_

Week Two**_ _Chinese Thought

_

Confucianism

Taoism

Legalism and Other Philosophies

Discussion

**

Readings** : Schirokauer, Chap. 2; Coye & Livingston, pp. 41-5 1.



**_

Week Three**_ _Chinese Dynastic Pattern

_

Xin (Ch'in) and Han States

Han Society

Process of Sinification

Discussion

**Readings** : Schirokauer, Chap. 3; Coye & Livingston, pp. 56-58, 71-74.



**_

Week Four**_ _Japan's Native Tradition

_

Shinto Mythology

Culture and Language

Clans and Guilds

Discussion

**

Readings** : Schirokauer, Chap. 6; Downs, Part I.



**_

Week Five**_ _China's Imperial Zenith

_

The Buddhist Impact

T'ang State

Social Structure in the T'ang Era

Discussion

**MIDTERM

** **

Readings** : Schirokauer, Chaps. 4 & 5; Coye & Livingston,

pp. 51-67.



**

Week Six** _Continental Influences in Japan

_

Early Buddhism

Nara State and Sinification

Heian Court and Society

Discussion

**

Readings: **Schirokauer, Chap. 7; Downs, Parts 11. 111; Duus,

Chaps. 1, 2.



**

Week Seven** _China Under Pressure

_

Political Change in the Sung Empire

Sung Society and its Transformation

Mongols and Other Alien States

Discussion

**

Readings** : Schirokauer, Chaps. 8, 9; Coye and Livingston, pp. 67-71, 74-79,
88-91, 128-136.



**

Week Eight** _Kamakura Feudalism Japan

_

Rise of the Samurai

Kamakura Shogunate

Political Buddhism

Discussion

**

Readings:** Schirokauer, Chap. 11; Duus, Chaps. 3, 4.



**

Week Nine** _Japan's Warring States Era

_

Ashikaga Shogunate

European Contacts

Triumvirate for Unification

Discussion

**

Readings:** Schirokauer, Chaps. 12, 13 (pp. 312-321);

Downs, Part IV (pp. 71-79) Duus, Chap. 5 (pp. 81-87).



**

Week Ten** _Late Imperial China

_

Ming State and Society

Manchu Government

Imperial China: Chan e Within Tradition

Discussion

**

Readings:** Schirokauer, Chaps. 10, 14; Coye and Livingston,

pp. 85-88, 94-98, 109-116, 136-140.



**

Week Eleven** _Early Modem Japan

_

Tokugawa Political System

Socio-Economic Change

Intellectual and Cultural Trends

Discussion

**

Readings:** Schirokauer, Chap. 15; Downs, Part IV (pp. 79-92); Duus, Chap. 5
(pp. 87-104).

**FINAL EXAMINATION DURING EXAMINATION WEEK**

