**Oberlin College**

**Department of History**

**Department of Politics**



**_History 345/Politics 311: Social Movements in China_**

**_from the Late Imperial Period to the Present_**



Professors Marc Blecher and David Kelley

Tuesday, 1:00-2:50 PM, Peters 305





Mr. Blecher

Office: Rice 224

Phone: x8493

E-mail: Marc.Blecher@oberlin.edu

Office hours: Monday, Wednesday and Friday, 3:30-5:00

|

Mr. Kelley

Offices: Peters 305 & Rice 312

Phone: x8646

E-mail: David.E.Kelley@oberlin.edu

Office hours: Tuesday 10:00-12:00 (Peters 305)

& Monday & Wednesday 11:00-12:00 (Rice 312)  
  
---|---  
  








![](Tiananmen%201919-1989)

May 1919, Tiananmen Square                          May 1989, Tiananmen Square



This seminar focuses on social movements and collective action in China from
the eighteenth century to the present. The course will explore theoretical and
empirical issues concerning the history of social movements in China: their
causes, organizational and behavioral repertoires, and impacts on various
social groups and the state. In doing so, it will combine the methods and
approaches associated with the disciplines of history and political science;
_i.e.,_ it will apply theories rooted in general issues and in cases from
other times and places to close study of the Chinese case in the context of
its own past.

During the first part of the seminar, we will read, contemplate, and discuss
some of the best new scholarship on social movements in China. Then we will
focus on students' research papers. Each of you will choose a topic to
research, prepare a bibliography and research proposal with outline, and
produce a finished paper of 15 to 25 pages that has gone through drafting and
revisions. Sessions will be devoted to dealing with questions of research
methods and strategies and the use of library and other resources. In November
and December students will present drafts to the seminar. For those sessions,
you will read fellow students' work, to be circulated in advance, and come to
class prepared to contribute to a discussion that will help all of us learn
about the subject matter of the papers while also providing suggestions to
each author about ways to develop the research paper in progress. Finished
seminar papers revised on the basis of class discussion and our comments will
be submitted at the end of the semester. We will present some of our own work
in progress as well.

Effective learning requires a strategy of active study, thinking and
interchange. To encourage reflective reading, by Monday evening of each week
you are expected to write out on the Alta Vista Forum - our computerized
discussion software - a short reflection on the book or draft research paper
we will have read; you are also invited to comment there on what others in the
class have written. You may also use the forum to raise questions on which you
would like help from us or from fellow students. You should also read the
forum on Tuesday before class, to find out what everyone else in the class is
thinking. All this preparatory work should help make our discussions more
productive. Brief instructions for finding and getting started on the software
appear on page N of this syllabus.

You are also expected to participate regularly in class discussions - an
activity that our preparation outside of class on the computer forum is
intended to make more inviting.

We will evaluate your work in History 345/Politics 311 according to the
following weightings:

> Weekly computer forum comments 25%

>

> Quality (not quantity) of participation in class 25%

>

> Paper 50%

**_Please take careful note of these proportions._** They reflect our
conviction that the week-to-week process of participating in the course
through reading, thinking and contributing to everyone else's learning in
discussion is as important to your learning as the paper you will write. In
the past students who assumed that the paper was their only responsibility for
the course were surprised at the end of the semester.

Please consult the schematic chronology and the guide to the rudiments of
Chinese pronunciation at the back of this syllabus. The former, in particular,
can help bring some order to the complex sequence of events that we will be
studying. The latter will help you to discharge your responsibility as
advanced students of China to pronounce Chinese words and names properly.

Each year Americans spend five times as much on dog food as on college books.
History 345/Politics 311 is doing its part to help us get priorities right.
The following books are available for purchase at the Oberlin Bookstore:

Esherick, Joseph, _The Origins of the Boxer Uprising_

Haar, B. J. ter, _The White Lotus Teachings in Chinese Religious History_

Perry, Elizabeth, _Shanghai on Strike: The Politics of Chinese Labor_

Perry, Elizabeth and Li Xun, _Proletarian Power: Shanghai in the Cultural
Revolution_

Prazniak, Roxann, _Of Camel Kings and Other Things: Rural Rebels against
Modernity in Late Imperial China_

Tarrow, Sidney, _Power in Movement: Social Movements, Collective Action, and
Politics_

Wasserstrom, Jeffrey, _Student Protests in Twentieth-Century China: The View
from Shanghai_





**_Schedule of Classes, Topics and Assignments_**



_September 5: Introduction_



_September 12: Theoretical Approaches to Social Movements_

> Tarrow, _Power in Movement_

>

>  

_September 19: The White Lotus Uprising_

> ter Haar, _The White Lotus Teachings in Chinese Religious History_



_September 26: The Boxer Rebellion_

> Esherick, _The Origins of the Boxer Uprising_

>

> **Brief statement on paper topics due.**

>

>  

_October 3_

> Library research session. Class meets in Mudd TBA.



_October 10: The Qu Shiwen Uprising_

> Prazniak, _Of Camel Kings and Other Things_

>

> **Paper outlines and bibliographies due.**



_October 17: Fall break_

_  
_

_October 24: Workers' Movements in Shanghai, 1919-1949_

> Perry, _Shanghai on Strike_

>

> **Progress reports on research due.** __



_October 31: Student Movements in Shanghai, 1911-1949_ ****

> Wasserstrom, _Student Protests in Twentieth-Century China_ , introduction
and chapters 1-10. __

>

> **Progress reports on research due.**



_November 7: Workers Uprisings in the Cultural Revolution; The 1989 Protests_

> Perry and Li, _Proletarian Power_

>

> Wasserstrom, _Student Protests in Twentieth-Century China_ , epilogue. __

>

> **Progress reports on research due.**



_November 14, 28 and December 5_

> Presentation of drafts. __



_December 12: Conclusion_

_ _

**_December 17: Research papers due (deadline firm, due to College
regulations)_**





**_BASIC INSTRUCTIONS FOR USING THE_** ** _ALTA VISTA FORUM_**



Alta Vista Forum resides on Oberlin's World Wide Web Server. It is easy to use
because it follows the conventions of common web browsers such as Netscape.
Here are some basic instructions.



**TO ENTER YOUR OWN COMMENTS (known as "replies"):**

1\. Beginning at the Oberlin Home Page on any networked computer on campus,
click to ARTS AND SCIENCES and then to ALTA VISTA FORUM.

2a. The first time you use the Forum, you must register. At the main
("Summit") screen, click to REGISTER NOW. Complete at least the top part of
the form, including:

¡ì Your login name, which should be in the form of your first name
(capitalized) followed **_without a space_** by your last name (also
capitalized); _e.g.,_ MarcBlecher. This will enable us to identify your
comments.

¡ì A password (which you must enter twice for verification). Use your regular
e-mail password, so you won't forget it.

¡ì Your full name.

¡ì Under organization, put "History 345/Politics 311".The rest is optional.

When you're finished, click OK at the bottom.

2b. For subsequent times that you use the Forum, you need not register, but
you must log in. Just click on LOG IN at the summit screen, and enter the
information requested (remembering to be case-specific), and click OK.

3\. Click to History 345/Politics 311.

4\. You will see a list of topics. Click to the current one.

5\. Choose REPLY from the ENTRY TOOLS MENU.

6\. Put the cursor in text area and type your reply.

7\. When done typing or editing, click OK.

8\. To modify your reply after you have entered it, just find it on the topic
page, and choose MODIFY from the ENTRY TOOLS MENU. and click MODIFY THIS
REPLY. When done modifying, click OK again.

9\. VERY IMPORTANT: When done, quit your browser. (If you don't, someone else
coming along to the machine can use it as if they were you, since you are
actually logged in).



**TO VIEW OTHERS' REPLIES:**

Get into the Forum (using steps 1-4 above). You should see the text of all the
replies there. Again - this remains VERY IMPORTANT - when you are finished,
quit Netscape.

Alta Vista Forum also contains extensive on-line help.



**_SCHEMATIC CHRONOLOGY OF_** ** _CHINESE HISTORY AND POLITICS_**



_c._ 500 B.C _._ E. Confucius (and other Zhou thinkers, including Daoists &
Legalists)

_c._ 220 B.C.E. First Emperor of Qin unifies China, makes virtual revolution

_c._ 200 B.C.E.- 200 A.D. Han Dynasty founded (and Buddhism from India)

_c._ 600 A.D. Turkic ruling houses regenerate the empire in Sui and Tang

_c._ 750 Mid-Tang revolution (capita taxes to land, migration north to south)

_c._ 1000-1300 Song (policy-making traditions; culture stronger than army)

1368 Ming expels the Mongols' harsh and short Yuan Dynasty

1644 Manchus come to power after the Ming falls in a peasant rebellion

1840 Opium War (unequal Treaty of Nanjing in 1842)

1850-64 Taiping Rebellion (Han gentry/proto-warlord armies save the Qing)

1895 Sino-Japanese War ends with China's loss

1898 Hundred Days of Emperor's reform ended by Empress Dowager & friends

1905 Confucian exams abolished for posts: Sun Yatsen founds proto-Guomindang

1911 Fall of the empire; Republican Revolution

1915 21 Demands (Japan wants China as protectorate); Yuan wants the throne

1919 May 4 Movement protests Versailles gift of Shandong enclaves to Japan

1921 Chinese Communist Party founded (then a minor event, in Shanghai)

1923 First United Front of Guomindang and Communist Party (Sun-Joffe
Agreement)

1925 Sun Yatsen dies

1926 Beginning of Northern Expedition of Jiang Kaishek to unify warlords under
Guomindang

1927 Jiang attacks Communist Party, forces it to countryside, begins "Nanjing
Decade"

1929-34 Jiangxi Soviet (land reforms) (Jiang's "encirclement campaigns")

1932 Japan seizes Manchuria (N.E. China), installs Qing emperor there

1934-35 Long March ("go north to resist Japan"), Mao becomes head of Communist
Party

1936 Xi'an Incident (anti-Japanese Guomindang generals kidnap Jiang
temporarily)

1937 Japan invades N. China Plain & coasts; Guomindang-Communist Party "Second
United Front"

1941 Pearl Harbor (U.S. enters war); Guomindang-Communist Party military
conflict in Anhui

1945 Japanese surrender; cities given to Jiang's Army: civil war resumes

1948 People's Liberation Army attacks in North and Central China; U.Shulu.
aids Jiang

1949 "Liberation": October 1 founding of People's Republic of China

1950 Korean War (June 25; China enters, October 25); land, labor, & marriage
laws

1951 Main land reform; patriotic bourgeois support for CCP in war; truce talks

1952 "Three-anti/five-anti" to purify & scare bureaucrats/businessmen in
cities

1953 Lower-stage agricultural coops begun: mutual aid _ pooling inputs; Stalin
dies; Korea truce

1954 Constitution, centralization; rations; Gao & Rao (regional leaders)
purged

1955 Higher-stage agricultural coops; First Five Year Plan announced

1956 Hundred Flowers campaign

1957 Antirightist Campaign; send-down

1958 Great Leap Forward (oversized communes, new factory capital,
mobilization)

1959 Defense Minister Peng Dehuai purged for criticizing Mao; revolt in Tibet

1960 Famine in post-Leap economic depression; Soviet technicians leave China

1961 Retrenchment to smaller communes, last of "3 bad years"; Cuba, Berlin
Wall

1962 Border war with India

1963 Socialist Education Campaign: workers & peasants advantaged in jobs,
education

1964 Atom bomb successfully tested; army organizes movements for proletarian
pride

1965 "On Dismissal of Hai Rural-urban inequality"/"People's War" (pre-Cultural
Revolution radical tracts, Yao/Lin)

1966 Red guards from cadres' families, then among ex-bourgeois & contract
labor

1967 Cultural Revolution at height: red guard factional coalitions, civil wars

1968 Clean class ranks: soldier-worker-cadre teams force order; USSR invades
Prague

1969 Lin Biao named "Mao's successor"; May 7 cadre schools; Ussuri River
fighting

1970 Zhou Enlai-Mao Zedong political cooperation: Mao supports "Gang of 4" too

1971 Lin Biao's fall; Kissinger's secret flight to Peking; China takes UN seat

1972 People's Liberation Army budget cut; official violence ebbs a bit;
Shanghai Communique

1973 Commanders shifted among military regions: Deng reappears (purged in '66)

1974 "Criticize Confucius" (an allegory: radicals criticize Zhou); leaders ill

1975 Deng Xiaoping quasi-premier for Zhou's Four Modernizations (removed,
1/76)

1976 Zhou, Mao die; Hua Guofeng Premier (2/76), Party Chair (9/76); "Gang"
jailed (10/76)

1977 Four Modernizations new line, but under old-style leader Hua; admission
exams for colleges

1978 Deng in charge at Third Plenum; "democracy wall"; Carter-Hua Communique
(US-PRC relations)

1979 "Rightists" exonerated: rural reforms extend; Vietnam invasion

1980 "Gang of Four" tried: some communes become townships; Zhao Ziyang Premier

1981 Rural incomes up, amid urban shortages: Hu Yaobang replaces Hua as Party
Chair

1982 US defense weapons to Taiwan, but US-China agreement on fewer future
sales

1983 Spiritual Pollution Campaign stirs doubts in Communist Party, but
campaign ends soon

1984 Industrial reforms announced; Hong Kong accord

1985 Old cadres retired at autumn congress; Gorbachev heads USSR

1986 Students protest delay of political reforms, but Communist Party is slow
to accommodate them.

1987 Dismissal of Party General Secretary Hu Yaobang; movement against
bourgeois liberalization

1988 Abortive price reform; inflation; beginning of economic austerity

1989 Broad popular protests followed by repression and martial law; rise of
hard-line leadership

1990 Hard-liners in power

1991 Consoliation of post-1989 leadership; economic austerity

1992 Economic austerity ends; debate on appropriate pace of growth

1993 Some releases from prison of 1989 protesters; economic overheating; rural
discontent erupts

1994 High inflation; continuing expressions of discontent

1995 Corruption a major issue; death of Chen Yun; economic soft landing;
Taiwan Straits heat up

1996 Economy stabilizes; Taiwan Straits hot; US-China relations difficult

1997 Death of Deng Xiaoping; return of Hong Kong; Jiang Zemin consolidates the
country's leadership at the 15th Party Congress, and then visits US

1998 At the National People's Congress, Premier Li Peng is the first top
Chinese leader in history to vacate his position in accordance with the
Constitution; President Clinton visits China; hardliners rise at end of the
year

1999 China tense in face of political demonstrations by workers and
_Falungong_ spiritual practitioners; US bombs Chinese embassy in Belgrade,
provoking popular patriotic outrage and state-approved popular demonstrations

2000 China remains politically tense in the face of rising unemployment and
protest; crackdowns on dissidents and _Falungong_ continue



**_  
GUIDE TO CHINESE ROMANIZATIONS_**



There are three major systems of romanization used in the general literature.
The first can be called the "post office system", though it is totally
unsystematic. It is mainly used for place names, examples include Peking,
Canton, and Amoy.

The other two are Wade-Giles, which was commonly used through the 1970s, and
pinyin, which is the official system of the People's Republic, and has
increasingly replaced Wade-Giles. You will have to discern which one your
source is using by inspection. (Most of our readings will use pinyin.) The
pinyin system is distinguishable by any of the following: x, q, z, zh, r, g,
d, b, ong. By contrast, the Wade-Giles system contains apostrophes and
hyphens.

Once you have deduced which system a text uses, you apply a few rules. The
main general rule is that practically all words you see, except family names,
contain two syllables. Sound them as containing two syllables, even if the
letters suggest three or more to you. A few system-specific rules are noted
below. The left side of each equation is the romanization, as you might see it
on a page; the right is a usual and approximate English equivalent sound.



_**PINYIN**_



x = sy z = dz zh = j c = ts ong = ung ian = ien ui = way

i is variable: "-ee" after most initials; "-r" after ch, r, sh, zh; or a deep
"-uh" or no sound after c, s, & z.



_**WADE-GILES**_



When not followed by apostrophes: k = g p = b t = d ts = dz ch = j. When
followed by apostrophes, these all have English sounds.

Also: j = r ih = r ui = way yu = yo yu = yu hs = sy

