**Humanities 1010:**

**Introduction to Art and Music in Western Civilization**

**4 credits**

**Spring/Summer 1999 - Call No. 65526 Section 001**

**8:00 - 10:10 MW, 1137 Old Main**

* * *



Click on the following links to view details of this course

Instructor  
Course Objectives  
Course Text  
Course Requirements  
Class schedule _**Revised as of 6/23/99**_ (Study sheets for exams are linked
on exam dates)  
[Most Recent Posting of Grades](grades65526.html)

Or:  
[Return to Jenkins Home Page](index.html)

* * *

**Instructor** : Mark Jenkins, 577-6923 - 51 W. Warren, 4th floor

Office Hours: Mondays & Wednesdays 10:30 a.m. - 12:00 noon and by appointment

email: [mark.jenkins@wayne.edu](mailto:Mark.Jenkins@wayne.edu)

* * *

**Course Objectives:**

_Introduction to Art and Music in Western Civilization,_ which satisfies the
Visual and Performing Arts component of the General Education Requirements, is
intended to give an overview of art, music and ideas from major periods in the
history of Western Civilization.

The objectives for Humanities 101 are:

  1. To survey a broad representative sampling of major monuments of Western artistic expression in a variety of fields, principally architecture, painting, sculpture, and music, from the Graeco-Roman Period to the Twentieth Century;
  2. To relate these art works to the cultural, historical, and intellectual milieu out of which they spring and to bring them into focus around the idea of a particular _style_ of art and music in each age and place; and
  3. To show the similarities as well as the differences in artistic and musical expressions from earliest times through subsequent ages and up to the Twentieth Century.

* * *

**Course Text** **:**

* Cunningham, Lawrence, and John Reich. Volume, 4th ed. New York and Orlando, Fla.: Harcourt Brace, 1997. _Culture and Values: A Survey of the Western Humanities_ , Alternative 
* Holmes, Ira. _Introduction to the Humanities: A Study Guide_. Second Edition. New York and Orlando, Fla.: Harcourt Brace, 1997. (This is now included with the above text.)

**Additional:**

  * $2 - $4 Admission to DIA (with student I.D.)

* * *

**Course Requirements** **:**

  1. **_Attendance for the full class period is required_**. You are responsible for all material presented in class. Attendance will be taken at the beginning (and, occasionally, the end) of each session. Students who arrive late or leave early will receive no credit for attendance. In the case of an unavoidable absence, it is your responsibility to obtain all class notes, handouts and announcements from another student. (I will not distribute copies of my lecture notes. Missed handouts may be obtained from me at my office during office hours.) Common courtesy would suggest a phone call to the instructor=s office, explaining the reason for your absence. **_Attendance and participation count for 50 points_** of your grade for the course; therefore an absence or failure to attend for the full period will lower your grade by 50 points / the total number of class sessions (roughly 2 points per session). There is no way to make up credit for classes missed.
  2. **_Reading Assignments_** are to be completed in preparation for each class meeting. **_There is important material in the reading which will not necessarily be discussed in lecture for which you will be held accountable in exams._** In particular, it will be important to recognize the names of significant artists, art works, architecture, etc. and be able to identify the historical period to which they belong.
  3. **_Class Participation_** **:** It is my hope and expectation that students will speak up in class discussions, ask questions and share information they have which might be of interest to the class. From time to time, students may be asked to spend time in small group discussions.
  4. **_Two Exams_** will be given, based upon class lectures, class discussions, class slide viewings, class music listenings, and readings from the text. Exams will be composed of (1) Term Identifications, Short Answers, and possibly some True  & False and/or Multiple Choice Questions and (2) some Slide Identifications by APeriod@ (style). **_Each Exam is worth 110 points, for a total of 220 points_** **.**
  5. **_Two Slide Identification Quizzes_** will be given. As with the exams above, slides will be identified by APeriod@ (style). **_Each Slide Identification Quiz will be worth 30 points, for a total of 60 points_** **.**
  6. **_A Museum Project_** will be given to be done at the Detroit Institute of Arts. This project will consist of a brief paper to be written on a work of art to be selected from a list that will be handed out in class early in the term. **_The museum project will be worth 65 points_** **.**
  7. **_Study Sheets_** for each period will be turned in with each exam. The purpose of these sheets is to assist students in assimilating the course materials and in preparing for exams. One study sheet will be turned in for each Aperiod@ (style) covered in class. **_The study sheets will be worth 105 points_** **.**
  8. **_Unannounced Quizzes:_** **** There may be unannounced quizzes.
  9. **_Writing and Presentation:_** Matters of good college writing and presentation will be considered in Exam, Project and Study Sheet grades.
  10. **_Make-Up Exams_** **:** "Make-Ups" and are **not given automatically**. The student will be eligible for a  "Make-Up" only if 1) documented evidence of an emergency is presented and 2) the student contacts me before the start of the exam or quiz. I am very strict about these requirements so please do not ask for an exception as none will be granted. If you wake up sick or your car breaks down on your way, call my office. If I am not available someone in our office will answer. The office is usually staffed from 7:45 a.m. and voice mail is available. It is not possible to make-up missed class times. If a make-up exam is granted, study sheets will be due at the time of the make-up. If a make-up is not granted, study sheets must be turned in at or before the next class session following the missed exam (see below for policy on late projects).
  11. **_Late Projects_** **are not accepted automatically.** The student will be eligible to turn in the project late only if 1) documented evidence of an emergency is included with the journal when it is turned in and 2) the student contacts me before the class at which the Project is due. I am very strict about these requirements so please do not ask for an exception as none will be granted. If you wake up sick or your car breaks down on your way, call my office. If I am not available someone in our office will answer. The office is usually staffed from 7:45 a.m. and voice mail is available. In any event, **Late Projects will be reduced 1 letter grade (10 points) for every day late including weekends** C to insure fairness to all students. Late papers may be turned to me or the secretary at my office at any time the office is open. To avoid all such difficulties, students are encouraged to turn in projects (directly to me in class or at my office) early.
  12. **_Plagiarism_** **:** **Plagiarized work will automatically receive a failing grade for the course.** Direct use of course material, close paraphrase of source material, and resemblances to other students= papers are considered plagiarism. If you use other people=s published work, quote and cite it. In the case of resemblances to other students= papers, because it is almost always impossible to determine which paper was the original, both papers will be treated as plagiarized work. Thus, students are advised not to share completed papers with one another.
  13. **_Add & Withdrawal Policy:_** Same as university; see schedule of classes. No withdrawals will be granted to students who have committed plagiarism.
  14. **_Grading System:_** There will be 500 points total for the course achieved from the following:

Points & Scale:

_Points:_ |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | _Scale:_ |  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
Attendance | 50 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | A | 470 - 500 points  
Slide Quiz 1 | 30 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | A- | 450-469
points  
Exam 1 | 110 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | B+ | 435-449 points  
Slide Quiz 2 | 30 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | B | 420-434 points  
Exam 2 | 110 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | B- | 400-419 points  
Study Sheets | 105 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | C+ | 385-399
points  
Museum Project  | ____65_ |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | C | 370 -
384 points  
**Total** | **500** |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | C- | 350 - 369
points  
  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | D+ | 335-349 points  
  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | D | 320-334 points  
  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | D- | 300-319 points  
  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | E | 0-299 points  
  
* * *

**Projected Schedule** **of Topics and Assignments:**

Any major adjustments in the syllabus will be announced well in advance.

  1. 5/10: Introduction. Background (Ch. 1)
  2. 5/12: Ch. 2: Early Greece & Ch. 3: Classical Greece
  3. 5/17: Ch. 3: Classical Greece & Hellenistic Period
  4. 5/19: Ch. 3: Hellenistic Period
  5. 5/24: Ch. 4: The Roman Legacy
  6. 5/26: Ch. 4: The Roman Legacy
  7. 5/31: **Memorial Day, Class does not meet**
  8. 6/2: **Slide Exam** & Ch. 5: Jerusalem and Early Christianity (Time permitting: In Class Review)
  9. 6/4: **Day Scheduled as a Monday, Class meets if necessary (announced on 6/2)**
  10. 6/7: Ch. 6: Byzantium and the Rise of Islam
  11. 6/9: Ch. 7: Charlemagne and the Rise of Medieval Culture
  12. 6/14: Ch. 8: The High Middle Ages
  13. 6/16: Ch. 9: The 14th Century (Time Permitting: In Class Review)
  14. 6/21: [**Exam 1**](65526Ex1SS.html) & Ch. 10: The Early Italian Renaissance - **Study Sheets 1 - 7 (Classical Greek - Gothic) are due before taking exam.**
  15. 6/23: Ch. 10: The Early Italian Renaissance
  16. 6/28: Ch. 10: The Early Italian Renaissance & Ch. 11: The High Renaissance in Italy
  17. 6/30: Ch. 11: The High Renaissance in Italy
  18. 7/5: **July 4 Recess, Class does not meet**
  19. 7/7: Ch. 11: The High Renaissance in Italy and Ch. 12: The Renaissance in the North
  20. 7/9: **Day Scheduled as a Monday, Class meets if necessary (announced on 7/7)**
  21. 7/12: Ch. 13: The Baroque World
  22. 7/14: **Slide Exam** _**(Note date change)**_ & Ch. 13: The Baroque World
  23. 7/19: Ch. 13: The Baroque World & Ch. 14: The 18th Century
  24. 7/21: Ch. 14: The 18th Century & Ch. 15: 19th Century - **Museum Project Due in class**
  25. 7/26: Ch. 16: Toward the Modern Era & Ch. 17: Between the World Wars
  26. 7/28: Ch. 18: The Contemporary Contour (Time Permitting: In Class Review)

[**_Exam 2 (Final)_**](65526Ex2SS.html) **: Monday, August 2, 1999 in 1137 Old
Main 8:00 - 9:30 P.M.**

* **Study Sheets 8 - 15 (Early Renaissance - Contemporary) are due before taking exam.**

**Final Exam begins** ** _on time - do not arrive late._**

**Note:** I hope that all will enjoy and do well in this course. I am
available for conferences and discussions about the course materials.

This page last updated on May 29, 1999.

