### HISTORY 181  
WORLD HISTORY TO 1500



**Objectives:** The purpose of History 181 and its sequel, History 182, is to
define and analyze patterns of meaning in the accumulated record of the human
experience as contemplated on the largest possible scale, that of the entire
world, from prehistory to the present. These courses are founded on the
premise that the human experience, in all places and times, includes basic
common elements, however great the accompanying diversity may be. It follows
from this premise that all human beings, and all the cultures and
civilizations they have created, are suitable subjects for comparison. We
shall therefore attempt to understand world history primarily by comparing
different cultures and civilizations, and by considering how they have
interacted over time to create successive patterns of regional, hemispheric,
and ultimately global integration. A secondary goal will be to learn as much
as we can about the distinctive traits of individual civilizations.

The subject of History 181 is the world from the beginnings of history until
1500. The year 1500 stands out as a rough dividing line for these courses
inasmuch as the European voyages of exploration were just then beginning to
tie the world together, more tightly than ever before, in a new pattern of
global interrelatedness. Prior to that time, societies in different parts of
the world had had proportionately less contact with each other. In particular,
Afro-Eurasia and the Americas had remained almost entirely cut off from each
other. In recognition of these facts, the main emphasis of History 181 will be
the comparative study of civilizations. Secondarily, the course will emphasize
patterns of integration that linked different civilizations at regional and
hemispheric, if not yet global, levels. In History 182, the primary and
secondary emphases will reverse, as global intergration moves into the
foreground of attention, and the comparative study of civilizations moves to
the background.

The goal of this course is not only to convey factual knowledge about the
human experience over the ages but to provide an interpretive framework in
which this knowledge can be set, and to help us all develop a fuller sense of
our common humanity.



**Text:** The following text is required for the course and is available at
SBX, Long's, and the University Bookstore:

Peter N. Stearns, Michael Adas, and Stuart B. Schwartz, _World Civilizations:
The Global Experience_ , Vol. I (Harper Collins, 1992).



**Written assignments:**

1) A _midterm examination_ , to be held in class. The exam will consist of
several identifications, a map quiz, and one essay question; it will cover
**all** material presented during the first half of the course, including
readings, lectures, films, and other material introduced during recitations.

2) A _short paper_ of about five pages comparing and offering critiques of two
films on two different civilizations, to be chosen from the videos viewed in
class and recitations. Videos may be checked out from Instructional Media
Services in the basement of Denney Hall (Room 060) for further perusal. A more
detailed description of the paper will be distributed during the third week of
class.

3) A _comprehensive final examination_. The exam will consist of several
identifications and two essay questions; it will cover **all** material
presented in the course.



**Recitations:** Attendance at recitations is mandatory. During these
sessions, you will view and discuss videos that complement the lecture topics;
you will also interpret historical documents and have an opportunity to review
material covered in lectures and readings. Keep notes on discussions of videos
and documents; they will help you in writing your exams and preparing your
short papers. Absences from recitations will be excused only in the case of
illness or emergency; you must present an official written excuse to your T.A.



**Grading:**

    
    
       attendance and participation in recitations      15%
       midterm                                          25%
       short paper                                      25%
       final                                            35%
    



**Make-up examinations and late work:** Make-up examinations will be given
only in cases of compelling necessity and on presentation of an official
written excuse. It is the student's responsibility to take the make-up exam at
the time and place that the instructor specifies. Unless you are a graduating
senior, you are responsible for taking the final examination at the appointed
time; do not ask for exceptional treatment.

Late work will be downgraded by one letter grade for each day it is late. Work
that is four or more days late will not be accepted. Incompletes will not be
given except in dire circumstances, which **must** be documented.



**Schedule**

**Week 1** **Reading:** Stearns, pp. xxvii-xxx

Sept. 20 Introduction: What is world history?

Sept. 21 recitations: Introduction; geography

**Week 2** **Reading:** Stearns, pp. 1-47

Sept. 25 Hunting and gathering, and the origins of agriculture

Sept. 26 Decline of the Goddess

Sept. 27 Rise of civilization in the Middle East and Africa

Sept. 28 Seiken: Video, "Alphabet"

Whitmore: Video, "The Lascaux Cave"

**Week 3** **Reading:** Stearns, pp. 48-113

Oct. 2 Rise of civilization in India and China

Oct. 3 Nomads

Oct. 4 The idea of world empire: China

Oct. 5 S: "The Ocre People: Nomads of Namibia"

W: "The Musical Steppes of Mongolia"

**Week 4** **Reading:** Stearns, pp. 114-61

Oct. 9 The alternative of political decentralization: Greece

Oct. 10 Confucianism

Oct. 11 Hinduism and Buddhism

Oct. 12 S and W: comparison of Confucian and Hindu texts (to be distributed)

**Week 5 Reading:** Stearns, pp. 138-61 (review), 162-83

Oct. 16 State and society in India

Oct. 17 The Roman Empire

Oct. 18 The Americas

Oct. 19 S and W: Reviews

**Week 6** **Reading:** Stearns, pp. 184-233

Oct. 23 **Midterm

**

Oct. 24 The expansion of Buddhism

Oct. 25 Relocation of European centers; rise of Christianity

Oct. 26 S: "Myths and Moundbuilders"

W: "Maya, Lords of the Jungle"

**Week 7** **Reading:** Stearns, pp. 234-300

Oct. 30 Rise of Islam and the Islamic world system

Oct. 31 Islam under the cAbbasid caliphs

Nov. 1 Islam spreads to South and East Asia

Nov. 2 S: "For Those Who Sail to Heaven"

W: "Hymns of Praise"

**Week 8** **Reading:** Stearns, pp. 300-49

Nov. 6 Africa's triple heritage

Nov. 7 Eastern Europe

Nov. 8 Western Europe: Cultural and political pluralism

Nov. 9 S: "Spite: An African Prophet-Healer"

W: "A Clash of Cultures" (on Africa)

**Week 9** **Reading:** Stearns, pp. 350-401

Nov. 13 Beginnings of European expansion

Nov. 14 American empires

Nov. 15 Video, "The Expansion of Europe, 1250-1500," and discussion

Nov. 16 S and W: Tips on writing film reviews; European vs. American
civilizations (cf. documents, Stearns, pp. 369, 389-90)

**Week 10** **Reading:** Stearns, pp. 402-49

Nov. 20 Tang and Song China

Nov. 21 The spread of Chinese civilization: Japan, Korea, Vietnam

Nov. 22 Video, "The Emperor's Eye"

**No Recitations - Thanksgiving**

**Week 11** **Reading:** Stearns, pp. 450-87

Nov. 27 The Mongol world empire

**Short papers due in class

**

Nov. 28 The world before European hegemony

Nov. 29 Summary and conclusion

Nov. 30 S and W: Reviews

**Dec. 7 FINAL EXAM 7:30-9:18 a.m.**

