SAMPLE SYLLABUS



History 459

The Jews in Europe and the Middle East, 1098 to the Present

6:30-9:10 Wednesday

Room BB-103

Instructor: Dan Goffman

Office: BB 212; Phone: 285-8770; E-Mail: dgoffman@bsu.edu

Office Hours: M 8:00-9:00 and 1:00-1:55, Th 10:00-12:00, and by appointment

**

Required Texts

**

Gl¨¹ckel of Hameln. _The Memoirs of Gl¨¹ckel of Hameln

_

Mark R. Cohen, _Under Crescent & Cross: The Jews in the Middle Ages

_

Jacob Katz. _Out of the Ghetto: The Social Background of Jewish Emancipation,
1770-1870

_

Theodor Herzl. _The Jewish State

_

Benjamin W. Segel. _The Protocols of the Elders of Zion: The Greatest Lie in
History

_

Isaac Bashevis Singer, _A Day of Pleasure: Stories of a Boy Growing up in
Warsaw

_

Hannah Arendt. _Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil

_

HANDOUTS

All readings but the handouts are available in the Ball State bookstore, CBX,
and TIS.

**

Optional Video Text

**

Abba Eban, "Heritage"

Part Four: The Crucible of Europe (VHS-SP1195)

Part Five: Search for Deliverance (VHS-SP1196)

Part Six: Roads from the Ghetto (VHS-SP1197)

Part Seven: The Golden Land (VHS-SP1198)

Part Eight: Out of the Ashes (VHS-SP1199)

Part Nine: Into the Future (VHS-SP1200)

**

Description

**

This is a survey of the Jewish role in medieval, early modern, and modern
European and Middle Eastern society. The focus will be on the commonalities
and differences between different Jewish communities, between Judaism and
Christianity and Islam, and changing attitudes toward the Jewish community in
the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Links between the groups will be
examined as a case study of majority/minority relations in towns, provinces,
empires, and nation-states.

**

Course Requirements

**

There will be a four-to-six-page take-home exercise analysis in which you will
be asked to write and revise an analysis of several documents (worth 200
points), two three-or-four-page book reviews, which you also will present to
the class (worth 150 points each), a ten-to-twelve-page (2500-3000 words)
review essay on a subject of your choice (worth 250 points), an in-class
analysis of two or three documents (worth 200 points), and a comprehensive
final examination (worth 250 points). Quizzes on the readings will be worth
approximately 100 points.

**

Grading

**

The student may earn a total of 1000 points in the course:

Take-home document analysis 200 points

Review essay 250 points

Two book reviews 300

In-class document analysis 200 points

Final examination 250 points

Quizzes on the readings _100 points

_

1300 points

A student who earns 100-94 percent of the total will earn an A, 93-90 will
earn an A-, 89-88 will earn a B+, 87-84 will earn a B, 83-80 will earn a B-,
79-78 will earn a C+, 77-74 will earn a C, 73-70 will earn a C-, 69-68 will
earn a D+, 67-64 will earn a D, and 63-60 will receive a D-. A failing grade
is a total of less than 60 percent.

**

Attendance and Make-ups

**

Although no grade points have been assigned for attendance, attendance **is**
mandatory. This course is designed with lectures and discussion that
complement, but do not repeat, our texts. In other words, **lectures contain
much material that is not in the readings**. The student is equally
responsible for in-class materials and readings. Make-up examinations and
quizzes will be given **only** with a valid excuse (illness requiring medical
care, crisis in immediate family, official university function) about which I
was informed **in advance**.

If you need course adaptations or accommodations because of a disability, if
you have emergency medical information to share with me, or if you need
special arrangements in case the building must be evacuated, please make an
appointment with me as soon as possible.



**

COURSE OUTLINE AND ASSIGNMENTS

**

14 January Purpose of Course and Introductory Discussion on the Jews in
European and Middle Eastern History

> > What role have Jews played in western civilization? How have Christians
and Muslims responded to Jews in their midst? What changes in Christian and
Muslim perceptions of Jews and in Jewish perceptions of Christians and Muslims
have occurred over the last four centuries? Why have such changes occurred?

21 January The Jews in Medieval Europe

> > Where did Jews live in Europe in the thirteenth through the seventeenth
centuries? Which Christians welcomed Jews; which expelled them? What economic
and social niches did Jews find? Why? In what sense were the Ashkenazi Jews
part of Christian European culture? In what sense were they apart from
European culture?

READINGS: Gl¨¹ckel of Hameln, pp. vii-145; Cohen, pp. xv-29

HERITAGE, Part Four

28 January Expulsion from Western Europe

> > Why were Jews expelled from England and France? Where did they go and what
did they find? What skills did they bring in order to fit into their new
environments? How did their new situation differ from their old? How did
Poles, Russians, Czechs, and others respond to the Jewish migrants? Did any
Jews remain in the west? How did they survive? How did the Ashkenazic culture
that was superimposed across Christian Europe relate to the majority culture?

READINGS: Gl¨¹ckel of Hameln, pp. 146-277; Cohen, pp.30-51

HERITAGE, Part Five

4 February The Jews and Islam

> > Why did Islam appear in Arabia? What was Muhammed's attitude toward Jews?
What was the attitude of Muhammed's successors? How do the Muslim and
Christian attitudes toward rival religions differ? Under what political
structure did Jews live in an Islamic state?

READINGS: Cohen, pp. 52-136

11 February Economic and Social Implications for the Sephardic Jews of the
Expulsion from Iberia

> > Why did the Spaniards, Portuguese, and Italians expel the Jews and how did
the expulsions influence the economies of those regions? Where did the
Sephardim go? How did they adapt to life in Amsterdam, London, New Amsterdam,
and other Christian milieus? Why did most Sephardim go to the Ottoman empire?

READINGS: Cohen, 139-199

18 February Jews in the Ottoman Empire

> > What was the role of Romaniot and Karaite Jews in Ottoman life? How did
the Jews from Iberia fit into the Ottoman/Islamic environment? How did Jewish
mysticism (kabbalah) evolve in the Islamic world and what caused it to
decline? Who were the leaders in the Ottoman Jewish community? How did the
_millet_ system work?

>>

>> READINGS: Handout (Avigdor Levy, _The Sephardim in the Ottoman Empire_ )

TAKE-HOME DOCUMENT ANALYSIS PASSED OUT

25 February The Enlightenment

> > Why did the Enlightenment occur? Why were the philosophes obsessed with
religion? What was the relationship between the French enlightenment of the
eighteenth century and the Jewish community of Europe? Why did Jews become
involved in the Enlightenment?

>>

>> READINGS: Katz, pp. 1-27

HERITAGE, Part Six

TAKE-HOME DOCUMENT ANALYSIS DUE

4 March Revolution and Assimilation: Hassidism and the Haskalah

> > How did the revolution of 1789 transform Gentile/Jewish relations? What is
Hassidism and why did it rather than Haskalah permeate Jewish life in
nineteenth-century eastern Europe? Why did assimilation become a viable
alternative for many Jews in Europe? Why were so many Jews frightened of
assimilation and what did they see as alternatives to it?

READINGS: Katz, pp. 28-160

FIRST BOOK REVIEW DUE: PRESENTATIONS IN CLASS

**

9-13 March--SPRING BREAK

**

18 March Anti-Semitism and Jewish Secularism

> > How does Anti-Semitism relate to other "isms"? Why was this a specifically
western phenomenon? What was the shtetl and was it a reflection of reality in
Jewish living? Why were the Jews of eastern Europe in the forefront of the
socialist movement?

READINGS: Katz, pp. 161-219 and Segel

1 April The Rise of Zionism

> > What types of Zionism are there? What type of Jew might have found Zionism
appealing in the nineteenth century and what type would have found it
appalling? Is a further division between the Jews of western and eastern
Europe, of Europe and the Middle East, apparent in Jewish socialist and
nationalist ideologies?

READINGS: Herzl

8 April Causes and Consequences of the Great Migration to America

> > What happened in late-nineteenth-century that pushed Jews to the United
States? Why did most Jews tend to migrate to the US rather than elsewhere? Can
one map out waves of migration? How did these waves relate to each other? How
did the Jewish immigrants adapt to and influence American life? What kinds of
comparisons and contrasts can one draw between the migration to the new world
and the earlier ones to eastern Europe and the Ottoman empire? When and how
were the floodgates to the US closed? How did that closure effect Jews in
Europe and elsewhere?

READINGS: Singer and Handout

HERITAGE, Part Seven

SECOND BOOK REVIEW DUE: PRESENTATION IN CLASS

15 April Political Zionism and Arab Nationalism

> > Why did political Zionism succeed over other forms of Jewish nationalism?
What were the obstacles in the way of political Zionism and how did it
overcome them? How did Jews of the Diaspora react to a massive Jewish presence
in Palestine? How did Arabs in Palestine react? Where did Jewish and Arab
nationalism come from and what is the relationship between them?

READINGS: Arendt, pp. 3-55

IN-CLASS DOCUMENT ANALYSIS

22 April Racism in Nazi Ideology and the Holocaust

> > What was Nazi ideology and what role did antisemitism play in it? Why were
the Jews chosen as the first people to be exterminated? How did the Jews of
Germany and other states within Europe respond to Hitlers policies, and why?
What can we learn from this event about the role of Jews in western culture?
How culpable are Germans, Christians, _and_ Jews for the mass genocide? Has
the Holocaust in any way transformed the attitude of Jews in the Diaspora
toward non-Jews?

READINGS: Arendt, pp. 56-205

HERITAGE, Part Eight

29 April The Jews as an Example of a Minority

> > What conclusions can we reach about the role of cultural/ethnic/national
minorities in traditional societies and in the nation-state? Is the Jewish
position in any sense unique? What other genocides have occurred? Must all
minorities have nation-states such as Israel to which to turn for protection?
Is antisemitism dead?

READINGS: Arendt, pp. 206-98

HERITAGE, Part Nine

FINAL DRAFT OF PAPER DUE

6 May FINAL EXAMINATION--7:00-9:00



[HOME](default.htm)



