History 340  Modern China

Spring 2001 Dr. Charlotte Furth

**SYLLABUS**





**_Books on Order for the Course_** __





John King Fairbank. 1986. THE GREAT CHINESE REVOLUTION: 1800-1985. Harper and
Row.



Shen Fu. (Translated by Pratt and Chiang). SIX RECORDS OF A FLOATING LIFE.
Penguin 1983.



Margery Wolf. THE HOUSE OF LIM. Prentice Hall l968



William Hinton. FANSHEN: A DOCUMENTARY OF REVOLUTION IN A CHINESE VILLAGE.
1966. 1997. University of California Press



Yang Jiang. SIX CHAPTERS FROM MY LIFE DOWNUNDER, 1981. Prentice Hall 1983



Xerox packet of supplementary readings (from bookstore)





**Class Topics and Reading Assignments** __





SECTION ONE: LATE IMPERIAL CHINA



Week of January 8: Introduction



Reading: Fairbank l-64 (Chapters l-4)

The Sacred Edict (handout)

Week of January 15: Late Imperial Politics and Government

Reading: Ricci's diary:"Concerning the Mission to China Undertaken by the
Society of Jesus" (xerox)

Week of January 22. Late Imperial Politics and Government

Reading:"Lan Dingyuan's Casebook" (xerox)

"Kangxi Emperor's Valedictory Edict" (xerox)

Film: "Forbidden City"



Week of January 29: Qing Society: Family and Private Life



Reading: Shen Fu, "Six Records of a Floating Life"



Week of February 5: Nineteenth Century Crises in China: the Opium Wars and the
Taiping Rebellion



Reading: Fairbank: 63-99 (Chapters 5 and 6)

"The Taiping Heavenly Chronicle" (xerox)

_First Paper due on Feb 13_ : analysis of Shen Fu,

"Six Chapters from a Floating Life" or "Taiping Heavenly Chronicle"



Week of February 12. Reform and Revolution in the Late Qing



Reading: Fairbank l00-163 (Chapter 7, 8, 9)

"Kang Youwei and the Reform Movement" (xerox)

"Liang Qichao" (xerox)

" Sun Yat-sen: the Three Peoples Principles"

(xerox)

Week of February 19: Review and Midterm Exam



SECTION TWO: THE TWENTIETH CENTURY



Week of February 26: Republican China: the Revolt Against the Old Society,
19ll-l937



Reading: Fairbank 167-203 (Chapters l0 and ll)

Lu Xun "Preface" "Regret for the Past" "Divorce"

Ding Ling "Diary of Miss Sophie" (xerox)



Week of March 5. The problem of gender and family reform

Reading: Wolf, _The House of Lim_. Film: _Zhu Dou_



**Spring Break**

March 12-18



Week of March 19: The Struggle Between the Communists and the Nationalists,
1927-49.





Reading: Fairbank 204-269 (Chapters l2,13,14)

Mao Zedong "Report of an Investigation into

the Peasant Movement in Hunan" "Analysis

of Classes in Chinese Society" "How to

Analyze Classes in Rural Areas" (xerox)

Second paper due: comparison of _House of Lim_ and _Zhu Dou_ ; or of Ding
Ling's "Miss Sophia's Diary" and one or more of Lu Xun's short stories.



Week of March 26: Making Revolution

Reading: William Hinton: _Fan Shen_

"Village A" (xerox)



Week of March 26: Revolutionary Society Under Mao l949-76

Reading: Fairbank 273-341 (Chapters l5,16,l7)

Slides: Revolutionary Peasant Art

Week of April 2. Daily Life in Mao's China

Film: _Small Happiness_

Reading: _Six Chapters From my Life Downunder_

Week of April 9. After Mao: the Era of Market Reform

Reading: Fairbank 342-368

Prison Diary of Wei Jingsheng (xerox)



Third paper due: A comparison of _Fan Shen_ with at least one other document
discussed in class: one of Mao's reports ("Report of an Investigation into the
Peasant Movement in Hunan" etc), _Small Happiness_ , or Yang Jiang.

Week of April 16. Liberalization with a Chinese Face:

Capitalism, Consumerism and Popular Culture in

China Today

Reading: "China Pop: After an Icon" (xerox)

"Living at the Edge" (xerox)



Week of April 23. TBA





**Written Assignments and Grades**



Written assignment will stress the analysis of primary sources, ie, the
exercise of historical reasoning using documentary evidence. You are
encouraged to think about a variety of genres as historical documents,
including film, ethnography, autobiography, journalistic reporting, and short
stories. The midterm and final exams will include questions to test your
knowledge of the basic development of modern Chinese history, and questions on
the interpretation of particular primary sources we have discussed in class.
Three short papers are required (4-8 pages) on specific assigned readings. The
first paper is on a single text ( _Shen Fu_ or  "Taiping Heavenly Chronicle").
For the second and third papers, I am asking you to compare two related
texts/sources that we have used (in each case you have some choice).



**Grading Policies** __

Grade distribution:

First two papers 15% x 2 = 30%

Third paper 20% 20% Exams 20 x 2 = 40%

Attendance and

participation l0%



Credit for attendance and participation. This is an easy credit if you come
regularly, and participate. All I ask is that you make a conscientious effort
to think about the material assigned for discussion. But if a student is
obviously blowing off these assignments, I reserve the right to dock the final
grade more than l0%.



**Office Hours etc.**



3:00-4:30 Tuesday Thursday or by appointment.

Office: SOS 262.

I also have e-mail: furth@mizar.usc.edu



Information about the course, including the syllabus, copies of study guides
and other handouts, will be posted on the class Blackboard Web site.













