**Syllabus**

**HISTORY 270 - HISTORY OF ASIA**

**Dr. Marilyn Levine, Division of Social Sciences** | **Lewis Clark State
College**  
---|---  
**![](images/Mail4100.gif) Email:
**[**mlevine@lcsc.edu**](mailto:mlevine@lcsc.edu)
******![](images/Phone3372.gif)Phone: 208 799-2270** | **Office: Spalding
218**  
**2000 Class - T/Th 9:00-10:15** | **Office Hours: Tuesday/Thursdays 12-1:15
_or by appointment_** **.**  
  
****

![](images/hiroshige3.gif) Asia presents a series of varied historical and
societal contexts. This is important because during recent years, issues of
worldwide significance have focused on Asia such as the immense population
problems in China and India, or the economic dynamism of Japan and the Newly
Industrialized Countries (NICs). This course will give an introduction to
modern Asia covering the entire region: South Asia, Southeast Asia and East
Asia. Diversity both between and within different Asian countries will be
explored, as well as different reactions to the West. Through lectures,
discussions, films, and other class activities, students will be able to
survey the rich cultures of the East.  
---  
  
**![](images/Red_LineD291.gif)**

**** ![](images/Blue_ArrowD011.gif) _[Asian History- Study
Guide](PDF/270sg.pdf) _ ![](images/PDFsmicon.gif) \- PDF Format   **
[available semester taught]**  
You need Adobe Acrobat to download and read this Study Guide.  
![](images/Blue_ArrowD011.gif) If you do not have Adobe Acrobat, you can
download it free ![](images/PDFsmicon.gif) [**click
here**](http://www.adobe.com/products/acrobat/readstep.html)

**I. Required Reading**

Ogai Mori, _Wild Geese

_

Elliot, _Sacred Willow

_

White, _China Briefing

_

Bouton, _India Briefing

**Assigned Reading on Reserve**



**![](images/Red_LineD291.gif)  
**

_

**II. Class Schedule & Text Readings  
  
**8/24 Introduction

8/29 Japan: The Meiji Restoration

Reading: John Whitney Hall, "Tokugawa japan: 1800-1853" _(On Reserve)_

8/31 Japan: Taisho/Showa Period

Reading: Marius B. Jansen, "The Meiji State: 1868-1912" _(On Reserve)_

9/5 **Film**

9/7 **Film**

**9/12 _ _Wild Geese__ [Outline Due]**

9/14 China: Revolts, Reforms & Restorations

9/19 China: The 1911 Revolution

9/21 No Class

9/26 Korea: 1894-1945

[ ** _Cultural Project Topic Statement Due_** ]

9/28 **Film

**

10/3 **Midterm

**

10/5 No Class

10/10 India: The British Empire

10/12 India: The Nonviolent Revolution

**10/17 _ _India Briefing__ [Outline Due]**

10/19 **Film**

10/24 **Film

**

10/26 No Class

10/31 China: The Nationalist Republic & World War II

11/2 **Culture Exploration Project Due

**

11/7 China: The Communist Revolution

11/9 The People's Republic of China

****

11/14 Contemporary East Asian Economy

1 **1/16 _China Briefing_ [Outline Due]**

11/21 No Class

11/23 **Holiday - Thanksgiving

**

11/28 The Vietnam War through Film

11/30 The Vietnam War through Film

1 **2/5 _ _Sacred Willow__ [Outline Due]**

12/7 **Film

****

Final Examination on Thursday, December 14th, 9:00-11:00

**



**![](images/Red_LineD291.gif)**

**III. Assignments, Competencies, Attendance & Grading Policy**

1\. Students will be responsible for one Midterm (15% of grade), Final (25% of
grade), Cultural Exploration Project (10%) Four Outlines (40%) and Discussion
& Participation (10% of grade).

2\. Competencies:

-To understand some of the basic diversities in Asian politics, society and culture.

-To empathize with Non-Western societies.

-To understand the development of modern historical forces such as colonialism and modernization.

-To integrate knowledge of Asia within the scope of a world perspective.

3\. Attendance in class is required and will be part of the participation
grade. No make-up examinations will be given unless prior arrangements are
made with me [except in the case of documented medical or family emergency].
Written assignments are reduced by one grade for each day they are late.
_Computer glitches are not acceptable reasons for late assignments_

4\. If you need course adaptations or accommodations because of a disability,
if you have emergency medical information to share with me, or if you need
special arrangements in case the building must be evacuated, please make an
appointment as soon as possible. My office location and office hours are at
the top of the syllabus. _All students are encouraged to make use of office
hours._

****

> > **![](images/Red_LineD291.gif)**

**LEARNING THRU DISCUSSION  
OUTLINE PREPARATION**

**Step One**

> > _Definitions_ : List three to five words of which you are unsure. Look
them up and write down the definitions of them.

**Step Two**

> > _Main Theme_ : Write down your version of a general statement of the
author's message.

**Step Three**

> > _Subtopic Identification_ : Identify two to three subtopics. Note the
subtopics you had trouble comprehending or which you think would provide a
profitable discussion.

**Step Four**

> > _Subtopic Explanation & Questions_: Write a brief statement of the subject
matter of each subtopic. Design a question that you would ask for each.

**Step Five**

> > _Integration with Other Materials_ :  Write down the meaning or usefulness
the material has for understanding other concepts and materials. This step
should include concrete concepts and evidence from the reading related to an
**outside** reading, lecture, film or other material. The analysis should talk
about the concept, the two sets of evidence, and the significance of the
comparison.

**Step Six**

> > _Application_ : Write down how the material can apply to your own life
situation- past, present or future. What implications does the material hold
for your own intellectual pursuits or interests?

**Step Seven**

> > _Evaluation_ : Write down your reactions and evaluation of the assignment.

[Adapted from Hill, Wm. Fawcett, _Learning Thru Discussion_ (Sage
Publications, 1969)]



> > **![](images/Red_LineD291.gif)**

**The Cultural Exploration Project**

The cultural exploration project is a way for you to understand some dimension
of Asian culture. You can select a country or region in Asia and explore a
cultural area such as music, film, literature, cuisine, fine and decorative
arts, or dance.

> >   * You have an option to either write a 5 page research report or create
some other form of expression for your Cultural Exploration Project. You can
deliver an oral presentation or demonstration or create a piece of art.

>>   * While the Web may be used for research, the primary research must be
based on library sources or other primary sources such as interviews.

>>   * We have reserved one day of class for oral
presentations/demonstrations.

>>   * All projects must be preapproved by the professor.

>>   * You must submit a cultural exploration project topic statement to the
professor on the statement due date. The topic statement should include:

>>

>>> > Cultural Area

>>>>

>>>> Project Title

>>>>

>>>> Project Focus

>>>>

>>>> Project Format

>>>>

>>>> Sources (Give at least 2 sources for your project)

>>

>>







* * *

**![](images/Blue_Swirl361.gif)[ Home](Default.htm)** |
**![](images/Blue_Swirl361.gif)[Syllabi](syllabi.htm)** |
**![](images/Blue_Swirl361.gif)[Resum¨¦](resume.htm)** |
**![](images/Blue_Swirl361.gif)[Useful Links](links.htm)**  
---|---|---|---

