**GO TO:**
**[Index/home](http://mcel.pacificu.edu/mcel/barlow/Sp02/H316/index1.html)|
[Schedule](http://mcel.pacificu.edu/mcel/barlow/Sp02/H316/SCHed316.HTML) |
[Games](GAMES.HTML) | [Assessment](Readings%20Assessment.html) |
[Roles](ROLES.HTML) | [Bibliography](Bibliography.HTML) |[ Electronic
Resources](ElectronicResources.HTML) | [BBS](http://mcel.pacificu.edu/cgi-
bin/webbbs/h316/h316.pl) |  
**

![](maobig.GIF)

**DRAFT** SYLLABUS

History 316 China From Mao to Tiananmen 10:00-10:50 MWF Spring 2002



  * This is a draft syllabus. If you are viewing it in hard copy it is found on the WWW at: http://mcel.pacificu.edu/mcel/barlow/Sp02/H316/index1.html There msy be some changes from the materials below. The books below, however, are those required for the class. 

_**CLASS ORGANIZATION**_ **:**

This class will consist of two sessions of lectures and discussions each week,
and one session of role playing, usually scheduled for Friday meetings, but
perhaps done on computer. The lectures and the readings will present a
chronological treatment of Chinese history from 1949 to the recent past, with
an emphasis upon political and economic change.

GAMING: The assumptions for the [role playing](ROLES.HTML) or "gaming" in the
Friday meetings is that all participants are members of Malo village on the
outskirts of Shanghai, a "real" village about which much information has been
published. Each participant will adopt the identity of a common Chinese social
type, such as peasant, soldier, factory worker, etc. In the role playing and
the associated papers, each student will try to develop a consistent persona
for his or her chosen identity, with particular emphasis upon the points of
political crisis in recent Chinese history, notably the mass campaigns and
struggles. The information necessary to play an effective game and to write a
good "role" paper can usually be found on reserve, though as the class
procedes I will presume that you are doing additional research in the library.

Each role playing session will be based upon assigned readings and a specific
"game," usually passed out one week in advance, with a decision or task-
oriented outcome. The class will be assumed to be a Chinese "small group"
which will attack each gaming session in terms of Chinese terminology and
political values, faithful to each student's chosen persona. The problems will
also be "real" ones chosen from the major political events of recent Chinese
history. We will begin with problems from the immediate post-Revolutionary
period and then work forward, roughly in step with the lectures, so that
participants develop a historical perspective as we proceed. There is a list
of [bibliographic resources](Bibliography.HTML) in these pages for your use,
though they are somewhat outdated.

![](images/Image24.gif)

_**GRADING:**_

This is a small class and participation will be very important, so attendance
is critical; three unexcused or unexplained absences and your grade goes down
one level. The elements of the grade will include four brief "role papers"
which should grow easily out of the research necessary for the role playing
itself. A mid-term exam and a final, and participation in the role-playing
sessions, whether held in class or on computer.

_**WRITING THE ROLE PAPERS**_

The role papers are similar to each other, the major distinction between them
is the time-frame covered in each:

    * In Paper #1, take your character through the Great Leap Forward of 1958. 
    * In Paper #2, take your character through the period covering the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution. (1957-67 height) to the death of Mao.
    * Paper #3  should take your character through the Tiananmen Incident of 1989.

_The purpose_ of the role papers is to write a character sketch of the life
experiences of a Chinese person, assumed to be a participant in the major
events of recent Chinese political history. In your paper, you should strive
to show an awareness of the generalities of life in China, in particular the
events of the great political campaigns, and also illustrate specifically how
role-types similar to your character were affected by those campaigns. Some
students have done their role paper as a diary, as a series of letters, as a
confession, etc. You may choose any voice you find comfortable.

_FORM_ : The paper should be about 5 pages long, plus endnotes and
bibliography. Cite materials which you have drawn from works other than the
assigned readings. I assume that you have all read those works and that your
paper may use them for very general background, but I also expect that a "B"
paper will show additional research in secondary works (scholarly books and
articles about China) and that an "A" paper will show both strong secondary
research _and_ strong research in primary documents: materials in translation
from Chinese sources, such as the JPRS translations series, _Chinese
Literature_ , the Peking or _Beijing Review_ , etc. I have posted the
[form](Resppaper1.HTML) which I will use to grade the first set of role
papers.

    * Thus a "C" paper is average, it goes little beyond the assigned readings.
    * A "B" paper incorporates _substantial_ additional secondary research.
    * An "A" paper is _outstanding_ , incorporating _substantial_ research in primary materials. The  "A" paper should also show _exceptional_ depth of characterization.

_LATE PAPERS_ are reduced one grade level per day that they are late. Papers
are due at the beginning of class; late papers drop one grade level
immediately after class begins.



_**Electronic Resources:**_

This course depends upon an electronic environment. If you are reading this
syllabus in hard copy, the electronic version can be found on the WWW at:
<http://mcel.pacificu.edu/mcel/barlow/Sp02/H316/index1.html>

  

**Books to be purchased:**

  * Meisner, Maurice. _Mao's China and After_. 1999. (Third Edition)
  * Chen, Yuan-tsung, _The Dragon's Village_. (Penguin Books) 
  * Mao Tse-tung, _Quotations from Chairman Mao_. (China Books, San Francisco) (Could use electronic version on line, too. See Electronic Resources
  * Hacker, Diana. _A Pocket Style Manua_ l. ISBN 0-312-08380-7 (Standards for writing and citing)
  * Goldstein, Melvyn, _The Struggle for Modern Tibet._ ISBN 0-7656-0509-0 (On order; in next week?)
  * On Reserve in library: Whyte, Martin King, _Small Groups and Political Rituals in China;_ Two books by Hinton, _Fanshen_ and _Shenfan_. _Fanshen_ will be useful from the outset in defining your character. There is another book on political participation in Chinese villages that should be useful. In the reserve collection is a series of collections of Chinese documents by Harold Hinton, these, too, should prove very useful. 

[ ELECTRONIC RESOURCES PAGE:](ElectronicResources.HTML) This is a collection
of useful materials to be found on the net., some graphics,  
the class BBS, etc.

**[Weekly Schedule](sched316.html)**



EMAIL: [barlowj@pacificu.edu ](mailto:barlowj@pacificu.edu )

**GO TO:**
**[Index/home](http://mcel.pacificu.edu/mcel/barlow/Sp02/H316/index1.html)|
[Schedule](http://mcel.pacificu.edu/mcel/barlow/Sp02/H316/SCHed316.HTML) |
[Games](GAMES.HTML) | [Assessment](Readings%20Assessment.html) |
[Roles](ROLES.HTML) | [Bibliography](Bibliography.HTML) |[ Electronic
Resources](ElectronicResources.HTML) | [BBS](http://mcel.pacificu.edu/cgi-
bin/webbbs/h316/h316.pl) |  
**

