

![Infofacts Course by Video](/infofacts/Images/vid5-lowres.gif)  
---  
**

ENG 220: STUDIES IN GREAT WORKS OF WESTERN LITERATURE

**

**COURSE DESCRIPTION** : Literary masterpieces from the classical period to
the present. Emphasis on reading for understanding and enjoyment of both works
themselves and the cultural contributions to Western civilization of the
periods from which the works are drawn. Includes works by writers such as
Homer, Sophocles, Dante, Chaucer, Shakespeare, Cervantes, Swift, Goethe,
Austen, Flaubert, and Woolf.

**CREDIT** : Three semester credit hours

***Please note:** ENG 220 satisfies 1 course (3 hours) in the 2 course (6
hours) requirement in the study of history and /or literature in some
disciplines. Consult with your advisor if you are seeking such credit. It can
be used as a free elective by English majors and others.

**PREREQUISITE(S)** : None

**TUITION AND FEES:** (in state) $258 / (out of state) $483

*Note: Tuition is subject to change.

**CLASS BEGINS:** August 20, 2001

**MEDIUM:** Video

**It is strongly suggested that students have ready access to adequate
computer with the proper browser and audio capabilities, and the ability to
communicate via e-mail. Instructors may require the frequent use of e-mail and
may provide important course materials and information online. Students
without access should contact the Distance Education office (515-9030) to make
arrangements.

**INSTRUCTOR:** Dr. Jeanne J. Smoot, Professor Emerita of English and North
American Treasurer and Sec. General of the International Comparative
Literature Association, has written on literary relations among authors of
Classical Greek, Spanish, French, English and American literatures. Her
primary focus is on the use of myth and other classical motifs and styles in
drama. A past director of the Office of Academic Programs, She oversaw the
worldwide Fulbright academic exchange for the US Government. She is also a
past president of Executive Women in Government. **For course information
contact:** Dr. Jeanne Smoot, 940 Stone Falls Trail, Raleigh, NC 27614. Phone:
(919)518-1925 ~ E-mail: [smoot@unity.ncsu.edu](mailto:smoot@unity.ncsu.edu) ~
FAX: (919)848-3899.  

**GOING TO CAMPUS:** You are not required to go to the NC State campus. All
tests and papers and the final examination are designed to be prepared at home
and are available in the course packet.

**AUDIENCE** **:** Anyone interested in general culture will enjoy this
course, especially since there are frequent references to the influence of
literature on the other arts and also on the interplay between literature and
history. Students who enjoy reading in a variety of genres, from plays to
biting satire and contemporary novels and short stories, will find much good
reading here. The older student who is experiencing cultural thirst can also
be refreshed.

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS:** There are two unit tests (they are clearly marked on
the syllabus) and two essays of 750-1000 words and a final examination. Tests
will be in essay-format, with some short answer questions and some choice as
to topic. The essay assignments may focus on a topic you did not treat on the
unit test.

**COURSE OBJECTIVES:** To introduce students to a variety of literary genres;
plays, short stories, novels, satires, and other forms so that they can
appreciate them and make informed, articulate evaluations of their worth. The
course should also help students to better understand the role of literature
in society.

**

TEXTBOOK(S): (purchased separately - available at NCSU Bookstores)

*Please get the particular edition ordered:

**

_A Pocket Style Manual_ , Diana Hacker (most recent spiral edition)

_Good Scent from a Strange Mountain_ , Robert Olen Butler

_The Canterbury Tales_ , Chaucer (Ecker and Crook, transl.)

_Candide_ , Voltaire

_The Plague_ , Camus

_Three Theban Plays_ , Sophocles

_Four Tragedies_ , Shakespeare

**

VIDEO AND TEXTBOOK INFORMATION:

**

All video tapes for the Distance Education video courses may be rented at the
NCSU BOOKSTORES on the main campus of NC State University. Textbooks for these
courses are also available, and may be purchased at the store. Visit the
store, located at the end of Dunn Avenue near Reynolds Coliseum and the Talley
Student Center courtyard. Address all inquiries to the **Catalyst Bookshop:**
Phone: (919)515-6113 ; Fax: (919)515-2618

Mailing address:  NCSU BOOKSTORES

Video Rental Program

Box 7224 NCSU

Raleigh, NC 27695

**REGISTRATION** : Contact the Office of Adult Credit Programs & Summer
Sessions for registration forms and for questions about the program. You may
write to: Office of Adult Credit Programs & Summer Sessions, North Carolina
State University, Campus Box 7401, Raleigh, NC 27695-7401, U.S.A. We are
located in the McKimmon Center (the corner of Gorman St. and Western Blvd.).
Toll free number: (866) 294-9903; Local: (919) 515-2265, E-mail:
[distance_ed@ncsu.edu](mailto:distance_ed@ncsu.edu) or FAX: (919) 515-9550.
Office hours are 8:00am-8:00pm Monday through Thursday, 8:00am-5:00pm Friday.
Other INFOFACTS may be viewed on our Home Page of the INTERNET:
[http://distance.ncsu.edu](http://distance.ncsu.edu/)

v-eng220 6/5/01  
  


**



**



