![](../asmtr.gif)

###  

> ### COURSE OBJECTIVES

>

> The course focuses on the evidence for man's antiquity and natural and
cultural history. The basic objective will be to provide you with a foundation
of information to evaluate human biological and cultural diversity as they
emerged toward us. The course is divided into four basic parts. The first part
presents a foundation for understanding natural selection and the basis for
change in the world of nature. This includes an introduction to genetics and
population genetics since these underlie the natural world. The focus then
shifts to man's place in nature as a primate. The third part of the course
presents the evidence for man's antiquity from a fossil and archaeological
perspectives. Early fossil and archaeological evidence from Africa, Asia, and
Europe will be explored. The fossil evidence will be placed within a framework
of models for early human behavior as viewed through different primate and
human hunter/gatherers, behaviors. The final part of the semester concentrates
on the emergence of modern humans and man's increasing adaptive responses
through culture.

You will be asked to think about what it means to be human during this course.
This implies that you should look for causes and effects, relationships,
faulty reasoning, and bias. You will be asked to push yourself and make
judgments and conclusions based on inferential skills. You will be asked to
compare and contrast different points of view. Often there will be no right or
wrong answers but only your opinion. Don't be afraid to voice it either in
class or in the portfolio record you will compile for the course. The subject
matter of this course is dynamic and exciting. Our perspective on ourselves is
changing all the time because we continue to learn from our studies of other
primates and of the fossil record.

### CRITICAL THINKING AND EVALUATION

You will be able to learn information in a number of ways. There will be a
series of special computer programs, accessible in the Information Commons in
the Library. These provide both basic information and ways to explore
principles that you are learning. There is reading material, most of which can
be found in Annual Editions in Physical Anthropology, which you are asked to
purchase. Additional reading material is also on reserve in the Information
Commons in the Library. These are short articles written for popular reading
that augment your learning. They are meant to stimulate your desire to learn
and ponder. There will be a number of video presentations that will illustrate
information that you read or hear about in class. Some of these will be
assigned for outside viewing in the Information Commons, but most will be
shown in class.

This course is what you make it. You will be exposed to new ways of thinking
about human history and how it conditions our behavior today. I believe that
the information you will be exposed to is important because it will provide
you with an intellectual basis for living in an increasingly diverse world.
Man, as part of nature, has been very successful. That success can be measured
in different ways. We make assumptions about our level of success that we need
to recognize in order to understand what lies ahead in the future. We are a
cultural animal. How we have evolved in a biological sense and used culture to
adapt is important to understand because we are contingent upon this past. In
other words, we are conditioned by our past experiences both biologically and
culturally. We should learn from these pathways. The question we will explore
is how these shape us as humans today - in other words, we will explore **what
it is to be human**.

### PARTNERSHIP

As the instructor for this course, I hope that you will view me as a learning
resource. It is essential to recognize that there is not an adversarial role
for an instructor. I am here to form a partnership with each of you so that we
can learn together during this semester. Please feel free to speak out in
class and ask questions. We are in class to discuss a variety of subjects. You
should feel free to come to my office whenever you wish. It is my view that
students should be taught to think about their world in light of the subject
of this course. You will learn to think about defining cause and effect
relationships, comparing and contrasting information and points of view,
developing inferential skills, recognizing bias, and making judgments and
logical conclusions. I believe in your ability to be creative within the
process of learning. As you go through this semester, try to become a teacher
as well as a student as you learn. The responsibility for learning is yours.
If you accept this responsibility, there will be rewards not just a good
grade.

As a partner in learning, the course Course Guide that accompanies this
syllabus includes a relatively detailed outline of what you will be expected
to learn. My role as a partner is to help you seek out understanding about the
subject. This Course Guide will move you through a "thinking process" for this
course. Feel free to move off of this center and develop learning beyond what
is here. As your partner in this process, I am there to help you move outward.

### ATTENDANCE

It is important that you attend class each session as scheduled. Class time is
important. During certain portions of the course, multimedia presentations
will be shown. You will not be able to see these other than during class.
These are especially critical for an understanding of the course. Lectures and
**discussions** are intended to motivate you. It is during class time that we
will begin to shape your intellectual basis for understanding human diversity
from a biological and cultural standpoint. Discussions will be a critical part
of stimulation for your intellectual curiosity.

Policy states that a student may be dropped after three unexcused absences. It
is your responsibility to attend class and to fulfill the requirements of this
course. If you must withdraw from the class for any reason, please notify the
instructor. There is no guarantee that you will be automatically withdrawn. It
is a part of your responsibility to contact the instructor for a withdrawal.

### EXAMINATIONS

There is not a strong emphasis on examinations for this course. This is not a
course where memorization is stressed. There will be no exams in this class.
You will be expected to utilize information rather than memorize it for tests
however.

### PORTFOLIO CONCEPT

YOUR PORTFOLIO IS DIFFERENT FROM YOUR NOTES FROM CLASS OR A JOURNAL. ANY
PORTFOLIO THAT REFLECTS ONLY NOTES FROM CLASS WILL BE SUBSTANDARD. PORTFOLIO
ENTRIES ARE TO BE WRITTEN IN SENTENCE FORM WITH EXCEPTIONS OF CHARTS OR
DIAGRAMS YOU MAY INCLUDE TO HELP DEFINE YOUR IDEAS.

You are encouraged to recount how your learning process is re-enforcing,
altering, or expanding your intellectual basis. Therefore, you are encouraged
to reflect upon your intellectual growth at various times during the semester.
Continue to ask yourself "what am I learning and why?" As you make REFLECTIONS
in your portfolio as required, it is recommended that you make these
reflections by taking a look at something you found interesting and want to
explore or question. Don't be afraid to question things and seek out answers
as a way to grow. The topics for the GROWTH are optional and personal. Extra
effort for building a superior portfolio is your extra credit. There are many
signs of extra effort and personal intellectual curiosity. Don't be afraid to
move beyond the central scope of the course to enhance your learning.
Everything you put in your portfolio will be graded.

### Thinking and Reasoning for Reflections

All entries are to be well reasoned points of view. You are encouraged to
think about the information that you are assimilating and evaluate it with
respect to your goals for learning. You are expected to ask questions and
explore your own ideas. The essence of your portfolio is considered to be an
evaluation, in your own words, that is a reflection of what you are learning.
It is a record of your curiosity to learn. Answers may not always be found. It
is important to ask questions and seek out an answers. Sometimes answers
cannot be found, but at least you have asked the question....and perhaps you
will some day find the answer. You may add other entries to the portfolio that
you see fit. Remember this portfolio is your recording or learning...a
personal document of this course. The idea of the portfolio is to give you a
chance to explore and ask questions. You will have a chance to develop your
writing skills by making this portfolio a real and effective tool for
learning.

It is important to provide your ideas, but it is essential that you are able
to support these ideas. If you say "you believe" something, then provide the
evidence that backs it up.

* * *

## WHAT IS A REFLECTION?

A reflection is your opinion on a subject. **Opinions are based on information
used as support**. A good reflection will include this information and will
integrate an idea with substantive support. The following is a hypothetical
reflection.

Information for reflection:

In the early 15th century, China was a highly advanced power in the Old World.
The Chinese led the world with inventions such as gunpowder, printing,
metallurgy, engineering and medicine at that time. Navigation was also in
China's strong suit. From 1405 to 1433, vast Chinese fleets, which would dwarf
those of later European expeditions, were already exploring and opening up
trade routes westward as far as east Africa. By 1431, a fleet of 62 ships and
28,000 men had reached the east coast of Africa. Then in a sudden policy
reversal, the Ming Emperors halted all further voyages and began to foster an
atmosphere of xenophobic conservatism. Science and technology decayed. Trade
became passive. And the next five centuries say China become one of the
exploited powers as European influence dominated. Had the Ming Emperors not
hamstrung China 500 years ago, world history probably would have been far
different today as a result. But their moment was lost.

Reflection:

It seems to me that history is contingent upon events such as this. The world
would be different had China continued to voyage outward instead of retreat to
become isolationist. Yet, history unfolded in this way leaving the door of
opportunity open to others. The world by 1492 was growing smaller because sea
travel driven by the need for trading markets had reached a point when someone
like Columbus would have discovered the New World (the Second Earth as Marvin
Harris calls it.) The discovery of the new world by Europeans rather than
Chinese made small countries such as the Netherlands world powers. How would
the Netherlands match up to a force of 28,000 Chinese? Stephen Jay Gould talks
about the history of the earth as contingent on many events. He argues that
one cannot replay the history of the world as you would a videotape. What if
one thing in history were to change? Won't everything following that change
also have to change? It is like Marty McFly going back into the past and
meeting his parents. If his parents don't meet, fall in love, get married,
where is poor Marty? We can't change history. It unfolded as it did and we
must try to understand it in light of what happened. We can always marvel in
the "what ifs" but we must stop at that. We today are contingent on what has
happened just yesterday, and a week ago, and a year ago, and a decade ago. The
United States policy toward the rest of the world will forever be contingent
upon what happened in Viet Nam. This is the nature of history. It is full of
moments that were lost and moments that were seized.

Terminology:

Trade - exchange between people

Contingency - the present is a product of past events that cannot be changed

Acculturation - contact between two peoples with differing impacts

* * *

[**Visit a Lost Culture - a reflection by Eric Buldan**](buldan.html)

[**Explore the Insights of Rochelle Medrano**](../medrano/index.html)

* * *

### COLLABORATION

You may work in groups at any time to reflect on the information you are being
exposed to during this session. However, all portfolios are to be personal and
written by each of you in your own words and own style. Don't be afraid to
utilize each other as resources.

**COURSE GUIDE  
There is a rather detailed and lengthy study guide that has been prepared for
your use in ASM101. You may access this guide along with other types of
helpful information using the World Wide Web. This course is connected to the
world of the Internet. Access may be from home if you have modem access or at
the Information Commons in the MCC Library. From the Web Connection, you may
send me an e-mail message if you would like. All MCC students have e-mail
accounts. If you want more information, please see me. I realize this may be a
new experience for you. It is quite easy and quite valuable since this is the
future of information transfer. I am around to help, however, if you are
having difficulties.**

* * *

 COURSE PHILOSOPHY |

 [CYBERSPACE INFORMATION](asm97.html) |

 [COURSE REQUIREMENTS](require.html)  
---|---|---  
  
 [Main Cyberspace Connection](../acwc2.html) |

 [Main Anthropology](../index.html) |

 [Main Human Origins Page](../asm101_main.html)

