History of Science and Technology 3332/5332  
---  
Science in American Culture |

Syllabus

| HSCI 3332/5332  
Spring Semester, 2000  
9:45-11 am, T Th | Professor Sally Gregory Kohlstedt  
with Teaching Assistant Erika Dirkse  
  
---|---  
_**

Course Description:**_  
The assignments, lectures, and discussions in this course constitute a survey
of the history of science in the United States, with particular emphasis on
the institutional configurations that emerged in the period since nationhood.
We begin with indigenous and European ways of understanding nature and the
challenges provided by the Americas. Much of the course is dedicated to
following the perceptions and practices of science and technology over time;
the establishment of an infrastructure for education and research; the
relationship among government, corporate, and academic scientists and
engineers; and the access by diverse groups to education in and practice of
science.

_**

Course Format**_ :  
Class meetings will consist of lectures, on-line assignments, group
discussions, and some class presentations. There will be assigned readings and
films. During some periods, the class will be assembled into small groups that
typically include a mix of students from technical and humanistic majors; the
mix of historical and scientific issues is also evident in the assigned
readings. The goal is to allow students to learn more by sharing knowledge
with and listening to alternative ideas of others in the group, thus serving
as consultants to each other; during discussion instructors are only to
facilitate and help to focus group attention on key questions. Since readings
will be the subject of questions and comments, students should be prepared to
discuss all reading on the day the assignment is listed; a reading journal is
strongly recommended.

_**

Course Requirements**_ :  
Utilizing lecture materials and readings, discussion and written assignments
are intended to increase student capacity to write independently and
analytically about historical topics. 1) Discussions are meant to enhance
participation, deepen knowledge of the themes of the course, and identify
problems in understanding the information. Attendance is therefore required.
2) Five computer based assignments will bring primary source visual and
textual materials together as another way of understanding specific aspects of
science in American culture; these are due as a paper copy at the beginning of
class on the day designated. 3) The midterm examination will be essay (one
essay and some shorter identification subjects). 4) The final examination
(similar format) will be primarily based on the course work after the mid-
term, although the essay portion may ask for some general reflections relating
to the earlier period. Students taking the class as 5332 will need to prepare
a 2000 review articles and books on an agreed upon topic; each of you should
propose your reading by February 10th and have the final copy ready on April
11.

Office hours and Appointments: Professor Kohlstedt's office is in 123
Pillsbury Hall, Winchell School of Geology and Geophysics (4-9368;
sgk@tc.umn.edu); her office hours will be on Friday from 1:30 to 3 pm with
other times are available by appointment. Erika Dirkse=s office is in 167
Social Science Building on the West Bank and her office hours will be
Wednesday from 8-10 and Friday from 1:30 to 2:30.

_**

Readings and Texts**_ :

The bookstore has on order the following books:

> > John F. Kasson, _Civilizing the Machine: Technology and Republican Values,
1776-1900_ (London: Penguin Books, 1976).

>>

>> Daniel J. Kevles, _The Physicists: A Scientific Community in Modern
America_ (Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press, 1995)

>>

>> Ronald Numbers and Charles Rosenberg, eds., _The Scientific Enterprise in
America_ (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996).

>>

>> Kenneth Manning, _Black Apollo of Science: The Life of Ernest Everett Just_
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1984).

>>

>> Lawrence Badash, _Scientists and the Development of Nuclear Weapons: From
Fission to the Limited Test Ban Treaty, 1939-1963_ (New Jersey: Humanities
Press, 1995).

>>

>> Margaret Rossiter, _Women Scientists in America: Before Affirmative Action,
1940-1972_ (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1995).

Those books are also reserve in Norris Hall, along with other readings that
may be assigned, so you may want to read the assignments carefully before
purchasing them for the course. Some source materials will also be distributed
in class.

Potential topics for presentation in class. These presentations would be about
twenty minutes, involve a short research paper and bibliography submitted to
the instructor, and a handout for the class: Benjamin Franklin (Jan. 27),
Maria Mitchell (Feb.8), science on the western surveys (Feb/ 8), science
journalism in the mid-nineteenth century (Feb. 15), the Agassiz- Gray debate
on evolution (Feb.22), the Johns Hopkins University and Bryn Mawr College
(Feb. 24), Veblen and the new economics (Mar.2), modern art and its science
connections in the 1910s and 1920s (Mar.9), Andrew Carnegie or John D.
Rockefeller foundations (Mar. 21), Cold Spring Harbor and eugenics (Apr. 4),
chemistry during and after WW I (April. 6), the International Geophysical Year
(Apr. 18), the Green Revolution (Apr. 25), the meaning of the Green Revolution
(Apr. 25), or Rachel Carson or any commentator on the problems within science
(Apr. 27).

_**

Topics and Assignments**_ :

Jan. 18 Introduction: Old Worlds and New Worlds

**

Global and Local: Science in the Colonies and the New Nation**

Jan. 20 The Dynamics of Science in Empire.  Go look at
_www.mnh.si.edu/arctic/html/ancient/html_

Jan. 25 Colonists Initiatives in the Era of the Scientific Revolution

Jan 27 Science and the American Revolution; also DISCUSSION on Kasson,
_Civilizing the Machine_ , chapter 1

**

Coordinating Science on American Terms**

Feb. 1 Natural Historians and Ingenious Yankees.  Read:   Kohlstedt, "Parlors,
Primers, and Public Schooling...." (N&R).  Due:  [ON LINE Assignment I
](http://www1.umn.edu/scitech/nh_title.htm)(natural history)

Feb. 3 Organizations for Science in a Democratic Culture.  Read:  Daniels,
"The Process of Professionalization...." (N&R)

Feb. 8 Science and the Government.  Read:  Hugh Slotten, "The Dilemmas of
Science in the U.S....." (N&R).  Due:  [ON LINE Assignment
II](http://www1.umn.edu/scitech/jh_title.htm) (Joseph Henry)

Feb. 10 The Regional Status of Science and the Impact of the Civil War

**

Framing a Scientific Culture**

Feb. 15 Public Forums for Science.  Due: [ ON LINE Assignment
III](http://www1.umn.edu/scitech/mu_title.htm) (museums)

Feb. 17 No Class

Feb. 22 The Natural Sciences after Darwin

Feb. 24 Emerging Professions and Higher Education.  Read:  Kohler, "The Ph.D.
Machine" (N&R).  Due:  [ON LINE Assignment
IV](http://www1.umn.edu/scitech/as_tradintro.htm) (astrophysics)

Feb. 29 Science: Defined by Methods and Practitioners.  Read:  Rossiter,
"Women's Work in Science" (N&R) and Kevles, _The Physicists_ , chapter 1-5,
13, 14, & 15.

Mar 2 Emerging Social Sciences and Beginnings of Progressivism

Mar. 7 MIDTERM EXAM

**

Science in Early 20th Century America**

Mar. 9 Progressivism, Modernism and other Isms.  Read:  Kasson, _Civilizing
the Machine_ , chapter 4

Mar. 14 Industrial Science.  Read:  Wise, "Ionists in Industry..." (N&R) and
Owens, "MIT and the Federal Angel..." (N&R).  Due:   Microtheme I

Mar. 16 DISCUSSION: Manning, _Black Apollo_

Mar. 21 Philanthropy and Reconfiguration of the Sciences in the Early
Twentieth Century

Mar. 23 Ambiguity about Science, Technology, and Culture.  Charlie Chaplin
film, _Modern Times. _  __ Read:  Gregg Mitman, "Cinematic Nature" (N&R)

SPRING BREAK!!

  **

The Century of Science and Technology**

Apr. 4 Science in the Interwar Years.  Read:  Owens, AMIT and the Federal
Angel...@ (R&R)

Apr. 6 Science and the World Wars.  Read:  Kevles, _The Physicists_ , chapters
20 and 21 and Rossiter, _Women Scientists_ , chapters 1 and 2.  Due:
Microtheme II

Apr. 11 The Atomic Age.  Read:  Badash, _Scientists and the Development of
Nuclear Weapons_ , chaps. 1-5 and Goldberg, AInventing a Climate of
Opinion...@ (N&R).  Film: _The Decision to Drop the Bomb_

Apr. 13 DISCUSSION.  Read:  Badash, complete and Kevles. _The Physicists_ ,
chapters 22 and 23

Apr. 18 Global Sensibilities in the 1950s

Apr. 20 NASA and the Space Race.  Due:  [ON LINE Assignment
V](http://www1.umn.edu/scitech/space_title.htm) (the space program)

Apr. 25 Scientific and Technological Imperialism

Apr. 27 Voices of Skepticism.  Read:  Lederer, APolitical Animals@ (N&R)

May 2 Changing Priorities in Science Policy and Practice.  Read:  Kevles, _The
Physicists_ , chapter 25 and "Preface: 1995"

May 4 The Challenges of Science in the 21st Century



Please read carefully the Standard Statement on Course Requirements developed
by the University of Minnesota. You will not be allowed to do make-up work or
take and incomplete grade for the course without a compelling reason,
presented in writing and with the advance knowledge of the instructors (if
possible).

[Return to HSci 3332 Homepage](http://www1.umn.edu/scitech/3332-home.htm)

  
Copyright 1998 - [Sally Gregory Kohlstedt](mailto:sgk@mailbox.mail.umn.edu)  
---  
[Program in the History of Science and
Technology](http://www.physics.umn.edu/groups/hsci/)  
---  
[University of Minnesota](http://www.umn.edu/)

