| ![](../clearpixel.gif) |  | [![Home](../Home_NkaganOFF.JPG)](../index.html)  
---  
[![Courses](../Courses_Hkagaarrow.JPG)](../Courses/courses.html)  
[![Publications](../Publications_NkaganOFF.JPG)](../Publications/publications.html)  
[![Lectures](../Lectures_NkaganOFF.JPG)](../Lectures/lectures.html)  
[![Resume](../Resume_NkaganOFF.JPG)](../Resume/resume.html)  
[![Family](../Family_NkaganOFF.JPG)](../Family/family.html)  
| ![](../clearpixel.gif) |  |

**Richard C.Kagan  
** Professor of History and East Asian Studies, _Hamline University

* * *

_ __

**H1250  
Korean Civilization: From Paleolithic Times to the Present.  
** Fall, 2000  
Richard C. Kagan - Hamline University LC140S, x2433  
Fax: 651/646-0034  
e-mail [rkagan@gw.hamline.edu](mailto:rkagan@gw.hamline.edu)  
web site:
[http://web.hamline.edu/~rkagan](http://www.domain.com/0%7Eindex.html)  
[Syllabus:](../Courses/h1250_syllabus.html) Under Construction

![Lee, Min-joo: Brush strokes](../Courses/LeeMinjoo.jpg)From 1945 to 1948,
Korea was just recovering from the emotional and physical devastation of
thirty-five years of Japanese colonial rule, and the ravages of World War Two.
The Koreans could list innumerable tragedies: a famine that affected millions,
an exodus of millions of their countrymen to the hardships of a refugee life
in China or the Soviet Union, or conscripted labor in Japan, and the division
of their nation into two states, North and South Korea. Koreans were faced
with the awesome task of rebuilding their country, discovering their history,
and recovering their sense of national identity.

Even this dismal reality did not overcome Korea's potential for provoking
admiration and astonishment. Writing about this period years later, the
Koreaphile Gregory Henderson commented: "During [those] years, Korea was one
of the most exciting places in the world." _(see Korea Studies, vol. 7, 1983,
p.121)_ __

The purpose of this illustrated study of Korea is to share with the reader the
splendors and creativity of Korean civilization. The earliest Korean clans had
settled in northern China around 500 B.C. Gradually they were pushed down into
the Korean Peninsula where they formed a distinctive and hard won political
independence. Koreans adopted the Chinese language and made China their
political, social, and intellectual model. Simply put, the Korean governmental
system was a variation of China, but Korean culture, religion, art, music, and
life style remained unmistakenly identified with a distinctive Korean
identity.. This identity became solidified in the mid-15th century when Korea
developed its written language. No longer tied to China through the Chinese
language, the Koreans could write and speak to their own people in their local
language.

The golden age of Korea's traditional culture flourished from 1400 to 1900. A
new literature which gave voice to Korean aspirations suddenly blossomed. Even
though Chinese statecraft and ideas of Confucianism still played a dominant
role in the court, the intellectuals developed schools of thought which
focused on Korean history, Korean geography, and the uniqueness of Korea. A
variety of religious rituals and beliefs grew profusely throughout the
country. The stimulus of an authentic Korean language released a creativity
that was absorbed in all parts of daily life, both public and private.

This surge of activity was blocked when 19th century imperialism exacerbated
the government's domestic economic and political failures. Korea became the
stage for imperial warfare. In 1894 the Chinese and Japanese fought each other
on Korean soil. In 1904 the Russians and Japanese fought for dominance of
Korea. Finally, in 1910, Japan incorporated Korea into its Empire. Until Japan
surrendered in 1945, Korea suffered from Japanese rulers who wanted it to
become a servant to Japan's needs. All Koreans had to have Japanese names, and
the Korean language was banned. In public-including schools, work places, and
civic events-one had to speak Japanese. Japan's surrender left a Korea that
had little sense of its history, or its own integrity.

Unfortunately the war's end did not bring peace to the Korean peninsula. By
1948, Korea was divided into two separate countries. Two years later, in 1950,
the Korean war began. The death and destruction from the active warfare which
lasted until 1953 created unbelievable tragedy for the Korean people. Hundreds
of thousands were killed, millions fled their homes, and practically every
physical structure in the northern two thirds of the peninsula was destroyed.
The cease fire in 1953 halted the outright slaughter and destruction, but the
inability to reunite the two sides-North and South-has resulted in intense
psychological pain and disorder.

![Lee Yoon-jeong: Egg](../Courses/eggkLYJ.jpg)In North Korea, a severe
authoritarian Marxist state established a doctrinaire system that made
everyone a servant to the state. At first the economy improved, but lately it
has deteriorated and appears close to collapse. The culture mimicked the
monumentalistic, and socialist heroic style of the Soviet Union. The model for
North Korea was a mixture of Chinese and Soviet political and economic
policies.

South Korea did not heal from the economic and ecological destruction of the
war until the early 1970's. After the war, the country was ruled by three
successive generals. They forced the citizenry to make great sacrifices to
improve living conditions through the industrialization. They froze cultural
change by a rigid adherence to "traditional" values which were seen as a
buffer to the values of communism.

Only in the late 1980's did Korea turn toward a democratic path. The last two
presidents have been civilians. They both have taken steps to reunite Korea.
Most importantly they have provided freedom in the arts. This new intellectual
freedom has drawn admiration from the rest of the world. Now is the perfect
time to study a Korea that is intent on continuing its grandeur, and on
becoming a major player in the globalization of the world's economy and
culture.

* * *

It is hard to introduce Korean history to the casual or curious reader of
things foreign and ancient. Most Americans become interested in foreign places
because of the cuisine, or because they have befriended an immigrant family,
or because they have friends from abroad. Although Korean workers were shipped
to Hawaii in the 19th and early 20th century, Koreans did not appear in great
numbers in the United States until after the Korean War of 1950-53. And the
first generation of Koreans had no impact on our views of Korea. The first
Koreans were war orphans adopted by American families. Korean children in
American homes eventually numbered over 70,000. Most were raised as Americans.
They did not bring the culture, the history, the language or even the food to
the consciousness of Americans.

It was only after Korea had achieved economic stability and political openness
that Koreans were allowed freely to travel abroad, and to settle in America.
In the 1990's, there were only about 400,000 Koreans in the United States.
There was still little knowledge and sparse communication between the Korean
community and the American public.

Yet, there has been an intense infatuation with Korean history by a small
number of Western scholars. These men and women have committed themselves to
learning Korean language, literature, philosophy, the arts, and the popular
culture. Although there are several important books on modern Korean politics
and economics, there are very few which provide a full historical introduction
to the culture and civilization of Korea. My text is written with the purpose
of encouraging the reader to become engaged with the spirit and excitement of
Korean studies in their totality.

To write about Korea history is a formidable task. The peninsula has developed
its own unique characteristics. Its language, its cuisine, its music, its
cultural developments are unquestionably Korean. Yet, it has had muscular
interchange with its neighbors. The most obvious relationships have been
through the clash of armies-stupendous battles with China; tragic loses
against the Mongols, and bitter encounters with Japanese military and colonial
rulers. Less dramatic is the interchange with China and Japan in the areas of
philosophy, religion, political organization, trade and diplomacy. In the last
hundred years, Korea has adjusted itself to the waves of westernization,
colonialization, revolution, and dynamic economic and social changes.

But it has also had creative relationships as well. Korea influenced its
neighbors in the areas of language, religion, ceramics, the arts, and
diplomacy. Korea's identity can only be understood in terms of its elasticity
and balance with regard to foreign pressures and internal synthesis. In many
ways, Korea is like Japan. It has been able to digest and nurture itself from
the influences abroad without losing its own integrity.

![Lee Soo-kyung:  The Winter Tree](../Courses/wintertreekLSK.jpg)In studying
the political history of Korea, one wonders how the country ever became
unified and independent against the many pressures that seemed destined to
make it either part of a greater China, or divided up into small regional
kingdoms. Unlike China, which was beset with civil wars and many fractious
kingdoms, Korea remained a fairly united country during three native reigns:
the Shilla (660-935 A.D.), Koryo (918-1392), and Yi (1392 to 1910.) Except for
the Yi, these dynasties did not always contain a unified Korea. However, they
maintained a strong sense of national identity that can be found in Korea
today.

Most books on history in general, and Korea in particular, adopt the
nineteenth century approach to history. The rise of the nation state required
the presence of historians to apply themselves to the task of legitimizing the
new nation. They focused on the biographies of the political and military
leaders who founded and protected the nation-state and thus were deemed worthy
to rule; they wrote intellectual histories which analyzed the political
principles of the leadership which formed the basis for the educational
system; they wrote economic tracts which urged the population to protect the
wealth of the country; and finally they wrote on diplomatic history and
international wars which gave the reasons for the population to be patriotic.
Sometimes they wrote ethnocentric histories which argued that their ethnic
group were a special people, with a special history, and a special destiny.
Culture, especially material culture involving pottery, clothing, cuisine, and
popular entertainment, was usually added as an afterthought, or a supplement
to the meaningful actions of the political leadership and the ruling classes.

The main problem with this type of history is that it mattered very little to
the Korean people. They were not aware of the details of the political system,
they were not concerned with the causes of war and diplomacy. Their sense of
self developed from the everyday activities of their life. Of course, there
were a few who took a deep interest in the political and economic life of the
country. But most were absorbed in the culture of the moment-their work day,
holidays, family celebrations, village organization, and religious activities.

Although it is necessary to provide a political and chronological framework
for the Western reader, it is not the major task of this text to write a
political history of Korea. Rather, after providing an introductory section, I
will concentrate on the values, attitudes, beliefs, and lives of the common
people. The text and the illustrations will provide a rich portrayal of the
opportunities Korean civilization has created for people's enjoyment and
creativity. The lives of Koreans were enriched by their music, their spiritual
beliefs, their relationship to nature, and, of course, their language itself.

This text will provide a narrative of the historical choices and creations
that Korea has made. By understanding the political and cultural history, the
reader will be able to appreciate Korean civilization. Through numerous events
of significance, one can obtain a long term notion of what it meant to be
Korean and what it means to be Korean today, and what legacies will follow us
all into tomorrow.  
  
---  
![](../clearpixel.gif) | ![](../clearpixel.gif)  
---|---  
|

[[Home](../index.html)] [[Courses](../Courses/courses.html)]
[[Publications](../Publications/publications.html)]
[[Lectures](../Lectures/lectures.html)] [[Resume](../Resume/resume.html)]
[[Family](../Family/family.html)]

