**SYLLABUS**

Government 6341
[Dr. Roberto M. Garza](http://www.angelo.edu/faculty/rgarza)  
Fall 1999
Office: Rassman 215  
Schedule: R
Phone: 942-2007  
Room: Ras 107
[Robert.Garza@angelo.edu](mailto:robert.garza@angelo.edu)

**Seminar in Comparative Political Systems**

**Course Description**

This course is intended to introduce students to the diversity of governmental
institutions and political patterns found outside the United States. Attention
will be given to three case studies which offer the opportunity to study Great
Britain, Russia, and China with respect to their historical and contemporary
importance, and to gain information with regards to political experience,
behavior, and values of these political systems. Of particular importance are
the history, political culture, and social setting of politics in each
country. In addition this course is designed to acquaint students with the
basic concepts and frameworks used in the analysis of comparative politics.
Attention will be devoted to methodology, conceptual frameworks, and research
applications in the field of comparative politics. Students will become
acquainted with various special themes: political system, political
modernization, political development, and revolution.

**Course Requirements** :

This is a research seminar. Each student will:

> 1\. Provide two oral presentations associated with a specific case study.
Each oral presentation involves the selection of a country and the development
of a topic associated with the case study. It may include materials from
additional sources not assigned in the readings. The oral presentation is due
on the week your particular country has been chosen for discussion. Choice of
country is limited to the extent that each country must be selected by at
least four students.

> 2\. Prepare two short papers and one long essay (written assignments should
be typed, double-spaced, 12cpi, and one inch margains). The short essays
involve an analysis of the week's readings pertaining to the topics of
"political development" and "revolutions." For purpose of fairness the class
will be divided into two sections with one-half of the class turning in papers
on one week and the other one-half on the following week. They are due on the
week the readings are scheduled for discussion. Submit a term paper treating
the scholarly literature found in the Lane text. The written exercise should
develop a specific theme associated with topics considered in the text. The
purpose of the essay is to review the literature pertaining to the selected
topic and to expand on the literature by consulting other sources. Term papers
will be _due on December 9 in class_. Late papers will _be accepted with a
letter grade deduction for each day late_.

> 3\. Actively participate in the weekly discussions.

> 4\. Participate in a mid-term exam and a final exam.

**Grading**

Your grade will be based on the evaluation of class performance as determined
by your completion of component parts of the course requirements. Each
component part will contribute a specified percentage of your total grade. The
short essays will contribute 20%, the long essay 20%, the oral presentations
10%, class participation 5%, the mid-term examination 20%, and the final exam
25%.

**Reading Material** :

The following is a list of texts required for the course. Titles preceded by
an asterisk can be purchased through the university bookstore.

> Brown, Bernard E. and Roy C. Macridis. 1995. _Comparative Politics_ , Eight
Edition. Belmont, California: Wadsworth Publishing Company. [handout]

> *DeBardeleben, Joan. 1997. _Russian Politics in Transition_ , 2nd edition.
Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Company.

> *Goldstone, Jack A. (ed). 1994. _Revolutions: Theoretical, Comparative, and
Historical Studies_ , 2nd edition. Forth Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace & Company.

> *Jones, Bill and Dennis Kavanagah. 1998. _British Politics Today_ , 6th
edition. Washington, D.C.: CQ Press.

> *Lane, Ruth. 1997. _The Art of Comparative Politics_. Boston, MA: Allyn  &
Bacon.

> *Palmer, Monte. 1997. _Political Development: Dilemmas and Challenges_.
Itasca, Illinois: F.E. Peacock Publishers.

> Peters, B. Guy. 1998. _Comparative Politics: Theory and Methods_. New York:
New York University Press. [handout]

> *Wang, James C.F. 1999. _Contemporary Chinese Politics: An Introduction_ ,
6th edition. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

  
**Course Schedule**

_September 2 - Week I_ : _Introduction_

What are the rules of the game for this course? What will be the basis for
evaluating student performance? Questions pertaining to management of the
course will be answered by discussing the course syllabus.

_September 9 - Week II_ : _Comparative Politics as a Discipline_

Frameworks and approaches are important for the study of comparative politics.
They suggest that similar questions can be asked for the study of particular
countries. Subjects that deal with history, political culture, environment of
politics, institutions, and public policy are the main topics of concern as we
engage in a comparative analysis.

> _Readings_ : Brown & Macridis, pp. 1-91 Peters, pp. 1-57.

_September 16 - Week III_ : _Case Study of Great Britain, part 1_

The starting point for the case studies begins with Great Britain. What is the
history and political culture of this country? Describe the environmental
setting of politics?

> _Readings_ : Kavanagh, pp. 1-117.

_September 23 - Week IV_ : _Case Study of Great Britain, part 2_

The study of Great Britain is continued with the consideration of additional
questions. What is the political framework of this country? Describe the
political institutions and linkage institutions associated with Great Britain?
What are some important public policy issues?

> _Readings_ : Kavanagh, pp. 118-243.

_September 30 - Week V_ : _Case Study of Russia, part 1_

The case studies continue with the shift to a country that has undergone two
major revolutions in the twentieth century. What is the history and culture of
Russia? Describe the environmental setting of politics?

> _Readings_ : DeBardeleben, pp. 1-133.

_October 7 - Week VI_ : _Case Study of Russia, part 2_

The study of Russia continues with the consideration of additional topics.
Discuss the political framework of this country. Describe the political
institutions and linkage institutions associated with Russia? What are some
important public policy issues?

> _Readings_ : DeBardeleben, pp. 134-265.

_October 14 - Week VII_ : _Case Study of China, part 1_

Our case studies approach ends with China, a country with one of the oldest
recorded histories and continuous civilization. What is the history and
cultural background of China? Identify and describe the political system by
noting important political institutions.

> _Readings_ : Wang, pp. 1-159.

_October 21 - Week VIII_ : _Case Study of China, part 2_

The study of China continues with the consideration of additional topics. What
is the role of the military in Chinese politics? Identify some of the
developmental problems of contemporary China.

> _Readings_ : Wang, pp. 160-371.

_October 28 - Week IX_ : _Mid-term Exam_

_November 4 - Week X_ : _Political Development, part 1_

The study of political development is concerned with evolution of modern
political institutions and economic systems. What are the various approaches
for the study of political development? What is meant by the transition of a
traditional society into a modern society?

> _Readings_ : Palmer, pp. 1-151

_November 11 - Week XI_ : _Political Development, part 2_

In the second part of the study of political development we are concerned with
the impact of development. What problems are encountered in the process of
development? What are the different paths of development.?

> _Readings_ : Palmer, pp. 155-281

_November 18 - Week XII_ : _Revolutions, part 1_

The study of revolutions is an integral part of comparative politics. The
first part begins with theories of revolutions. A significant number of
scholars have played an important role in developing this literature. What are
the various theories and viewpoints of specific scholars? Discuss specific
case studies of revolutions.

> _Readings_ : Goldstone, pp. 1-165

_November 25 - Week XIII_ : _Thanksgiving Break_

_December 2 - Week XIV_ : _Revolutions, part 2_

The second part continues with the analysis of specific case studies. The
focus is on the study of revolutionary outcomes, and the role of individuals
and groups in revolutions.

> _Readings_ : Goldstone, pp. 165-318.

_December 9 - Week XV_ : _Theory in comparative politics_

There are several approaches to the study of comparative politics. To assess
these approaches Lane provides a historical sketch of the major periods
associated with the practice of comparative politics, noting the important
impact of the behavioral movement. The approaches include the return of the
state, political development, grassroots and peasant politics, state-in-
society, and the new institutionalism. Develop an analysis that narrows on a
specific topic suggested by the practice of comparative politics and provide a
short class presentation.

> _Readings_ : Lane, pp. 1-142.

* * *

[

ASU Home Page](http://www.angelo.edu/) | [Govt Home
Page](http://www.angelo.edu/dept/government)

_Last revised on September 24, 1999_  
_Comments :[Robert.Garza@angelo.edu](mailto:robert.garza@angelo.edu)_

