



[homepage](index.html)

[syllabus](syl.html)

[course schedule](csc.html)

[assignments](assign.html)

[deadlines](dead.html)





![kura \(storehouse\) at Shikoku Farmhouse Village Museum
\(2001\)](Hiroshima1001.jpg)



|  |    **HIS 371 / 571,  ** **THE HISTORY OF JAPAN**

##

* * *

  
SYLLABUS

* * *



  
**INTRODUCTION** : HIS 371 / 571, History of Japan, undertakes a chronological
survey of political, economic, social, cultural, religious and intellectual
life in Japan from the third century to the present day.

Emphasis is placed on both the origin and development of traditional Japanese
civilization before the arrival of the modernizing West and the subsequent
Japanese quest for international acceptance thereafter. The course has been
purposefully designed to provide a background against which contemporary Japan
might be better understood and appreciated.

Course content stresses the origin and development of various systems and
institutions (social, political, economic and religious) within both the
traditional and modern Japanese cultural milieu. The modernization process,
the Westernization process and the fate of traditional institutions, systems
and customs also will be explored in depth. Strong consideration will be given
Japan's quest for acceptance as a major power on the modern international
scene and the impact of change on both individuals and groups within Japanese
society.  
     
**MAJOR COURSE OBJECTIVES** : at the end of fifteen weeks of instruction,
students enrolled in HIS 371 / 571, History of Japan, should be able to --  

  * identify basic terms, personalities and concepts associated with the study of Japanese history and explain their historical significance; 
  * identify and locate important items of geographical information and both evaluate and explain the environmental impact on the historical development of traditional Japanese culture; 
  * given an interpretive question regarding a specific period in Japanese history, demonstrate a firm grasp of the era's historical significance;  
  * discuss with insight and the use of supporting evidence the developmental process behind and the basic characteristics of social, political, economic, cultural and religious life in traditional Japan before the arrival of the modernizing West in 1853; 
  * assess insights into traditional Japanese culture gained from reading various selections of traditional literature, poetry and drama, including specifically _The Confessions of Lady Nijo_ and _Four Major Plays of Chikamatsu_ ; 
  * distinguish and discuss internally generated aspects of the modernization process present in Japanese life before 1868 and predict the Japanese reaction to the impact of Western-induced modernization in Japan after 1854; 
  * account for the collapse of the Tokugawa-controlled Military - Bureaucratic state in 1868; 
  * discuss with illustrative detail the patterns of economic, political, social and cultural modernization emerging in Japan after 1868, accounting in the process for the impact on these patterns of both past Japanese traditions and the process of Westernization; 
  * assess insights into life in modern Japan gained from reading Natsume Soseki's _Kokoro_ ** __** and Junichiro Tanizaki's _The Makioka Sisters_ ; 
  * describe and discuss the historical process leading to Japanese involvement in World War II; 
  * describe the effects of both war and its aftermath, the occupation, and Japan's "economic miracle" on present day Japanese life and institutions; 
  * discuss aspects of Japanese life today in historical perspective, pointing out and evaluating continuing traditional influences and the impact of the past on modern day Japan; 
  * utilize and evaluate visual resources to advance comprehension and understanding of the process of Japanese cultural development; 
  * assess attitude shifts in personal images associated with Japan taking place as a result of enrolling in this course. 

The major content in HIS 371 / 571 will be delivered by means of a series of
lectures, assigned readings and Internet presentations (see
**[assignments](assign.html) ** page) plus discussions following the list of
topics found in the **[course
schedule](http://www.csuohio.edu/history/courses/his371/csc.html)**. Class
discussion of any topic under consideration is both welcomed and encouraged at
any time.  
     
REGULAR ATTENDANCE AT LECTURE AND DISCUSSION MEETINGS IS A BASIC COURSE
REQUIREMENT.  
     
No examinations will be given in the course. Students will be asked to
complete a series of six Journal Assignments and a series of five quiz
questions scheduled at regular intervals through-out the semester (see
**[assignments](assign.html) ** page).  
     
Two brief (6 - 9 pages) essays are also required, the first on either _The
Confessions of Lady Nijo_ (translated by Karen Brazell) or _Four Major Plays
of Chikamatsu_ (translated by Donald Keene) and the second to be based on
either of two novels, Natsume Soseki's _Kokoro_ ** __** or Junichiro
Tanizaki's _The Makioka Sisters_ ** __** (see **[assignments](assign.html) **
page).  
     
Additional reading for the course -- as noted in the **[course
schedule](csc.html)** \-- is from the Conrad Totman text, _Japan before Perry:
A Short History_ and Marius B. Jansen's _The Making of Modern Japan_. All
course texts are available for purchase in the bookstore. All text and essay
assignments are noted in the **[course schedule](csc.html)** on the date each
is due.  


**|[course expectations and assumptions](expect.html) | [course evaluation
criteria](cec.html) ** |



|  
---|---|---|---  
  
* * *

This site has been prepared by [Lee A.
Makela](http://www.csuohio.edu/history/fac-stf/lam.html)
([l.makela@csuohio.edu](mailto:l.makela@csuohio.edu)) for the use of students
at [Cleveland State University](http://www.csuohio.edu), Cleveland, Ohio, USA,
who are enrolled in [HIS 371 / 571, History of
Japan](http://www.csuohio.edu/history/Classes/371.html) during the Fall
Semester of the 2001 - 2002 Academic Year; please contact him with any
comments. **    **

* * *

Last revised: August 27, 2001

* * *

