Spring 2002 Prof. Andrew Gordon

Harvard University Coolidge 319

History 1851 agordon@fas.harvard.edu

Tuesday, 2-4 495-3220

****

  
  

**Twentieth Century Japan**

  
  

The history of Japan in the twentieth century is doubly fascinating, both in
its own right and as a point of departure for comparative reflection on great
themes of modern global history: the social upheavals and transformations of
capitalism and democracy, the rise and fall of imperialism, the experience of
total war, the spread of mass consumer culture. We take up these themes
through an inquiry into experience in Japan over the past 100 years. The
course emphasizes two sorts of diversity: the wide range of experience and
understandings held by historical actors themselves, and the varied opinions
of historians seeking to make sense of the past. We give attention to
differences of region, of city and country, of gender and social class. We
examine the ways such differences have been construed and manipulated by
historical actors and by historians.

In addition to reading secondary historical literature, we will read and
analyze documentary sources in translation or documents originally recorded in
Western languages.

  
  

_Class meetings and Readings:_

2/5 Introduction and Legacies of the Meiji Revolution

  
  

The Meiji Constitution and Imperial Rescript on Education (on website).

  
  

2/12 Parliamentary Government and the Rise of Capitalism

  
  

***** Duus, _Party Rivalry and Political Change_ , Chs. 1-2, pp. 1-49. *****
Crawcour, "Industrialization, 1880-1920" in Cambridge History of Japan, Vol 6,
385-450. ***** Garon, _State and Labor in Japan_ Chs. 1-2, pp. 1-72. Yoshino,
in Sources of Japanese Tradition, revised edition (SJT),34-61. [Background
text: Duus, Chs. 9-10]

  
  

2/19 Empire and Social Order

  
  

***** Pyle, "The Technology of Japanese Nationalism," in _Journal of Asian
Studies_ , 1974. ***** Gluck, _Japan's Modern Myths_ , ch. 4, 73-101. ******
Sharon Nolte and Sally Hastings, "Meiji State's Policy Toward Women," in
Bernstein, ed., _Recreating Japanese Women_ , 151-74. Tokutomi, "Nationalism,"
and Okakura, "Asia is One," in _SJT_. 1-15, 1-9. [Duus, Ch. 8].

  
  

2/26 Class Relations in Imperial Japan

  
  

***** Waswo, "In Search of Equity" in _Conflict in Modern Japanese History_ ,
pp. 366-411. ****** Molony, "Women in the Cotton Textile Industry," in
_Recreating Japanese Women_ , pp. 217-38. ***** Gordon, _Imperial Democracy_
Chs. 6-7, pp. 144-203. Gondo, "Privileged and Commoners," _SJT_. 12-16.

[Duus, Ch. 11].

  
  

3/5 Gender Relations and Culture in Imperial Japan

  
  

****** Margit Nagy, "Middle-Class Working Women" and ****** Miriam Silverberg,
"Modern Girl as Militant" in _Recreating Japanese Women_ , pp.199-216, 239-266
. ***** Harry Harootunian, "Figuring the Folk" in Vlastos, ed., _Mirror of
Modernity_ pp. 144-159. *E. Taylor Atkins, _Blue Nippon_ , ch.3, pp.
93-126.Yamakawa and Hiratsuka, in _SJT_ , 14-24.

  
  

3/12 The Repudiation of Imperial Democracy

  
  

***** Gordon, _Labor and Imperial Democracy_ , ch 9, pp 237-69. ***** Kerry
Smith, "Rural Revitalization in the 1930s." ***** Garon, "State and Society in
Interwar Japan," in Goldman and Gordon, eds., _Historical Perspectives on
Contemporary East Asia_ pp. 155-82. *Young, _Total Empire_ , ch. 3, pp.
55-114. Kita Ikki in _SJT_. 16-27. [Duus, chs. 11-12]

  
  

3/19 The Road to War

  
  

***** Chalmers Johnson, _MITI and the Japanese Miracle_ , Chs. 3-4, pp.
83-156. ****** Ted Cook and Haruko Cook, _Japan at War_ , Intro and Part I,
pp. 3-68. Konoe statements, and Army manifesto, in _SJT_. 1-23.[Duus, ch. 13]

  
  

4/2 Japan at War

  
  

****** Cook and Cook, _Japan at War_ , pp. 99-120, 169-98, 231-58, 305-72.
****** Miyake, "Doubling Expectations," in _Recreating Women_ , pp. 267-95.
***** Herbert Bix, "Japan's Delayed Surrender: A Reinterpretation," in
_Diplomatic History_ (Spring, 1995) pp. 197-225. [Duus, Ch. 14]

  
  

4/9 The Occupiers and the Occupied

  
  

****** John Dower, _Embracing Defeat: Japan after WWII_ Parts I-III [Duus, Ch.
15]

  
  

4/16 Economic Recovery and Conservative Revival

  
  

****** Andrew Gordon ed., _Postwar Japan as History_ , Chs. 1, 4. *****
Chalmers Johnson, _MITI and the Japanese Miracle_ , Chs. 5-6, 157-241. *****
Gordon, "Transwar through Postwar Japan" in Goldman and Gordon, _Historical
Perspectives on Contemporary East Asia_ , pp. 272-96. Nakasone, White Paper
(1956), Income Doubling Plan, Tanaka's "Renovation of the Archipelago," in
_SJT_. 2-4, 6-11. [Duus, chs. 16-17].

  
  

4/23 Heyday of Middle Class Society: Education, Family, and Work

  
  

****** Gordon, ed., _Postwar Japan as History_ , Chs. 8, 11, 14. ***** Makoto
Kumazawa, _Portraits of the Japanese Workplace_ , ch. 7, pp. 159-204. Consumer
revolution, Orii Hyuga on labor relations, Symbol monarchy and mass culture,
oil crisis, Minamata, QC Circles in _SJT_ , 12-31.

  
  

4/30 Looking Back: The Presence of the Past

  
  

****** _Postwar Japan as History_ , Ch. 3. Tessa Morris-Suzuki, _Re-Inventing
Japan: Time, Space, Nation_ (selections TBA). Middle Class at Century's End,
in _SJT_ , 32-35.

****************************

  
  
  
  

**Assignments and Grading:** There will be two major written assignments
(10-12 pages each) in the course. In one, students will analyze a set of
secondary works, books and/or articles, addressing a topic of their choosing.
_This will be due on March 23_. In the other, students will collect and
analyze primary documents addressing a topic of their choosing. For this
assignment students can draw on a modest but well-selected body of translated
documents available for the prewar era, the huge body of government and other
documents concerning the war and occupation, as well as the vast literature of
Westerners-- missionaries, traders, journalists, academics-- observing
contemporaneous events of 20th century Japan. _This will be due on May 11_. In
addition, students will be required to prepare brief written reactions to each
week's readings prior to weekly discussion sections. **Grading** will be
weighted as follows: Papers (40% each), class participation (20%). There will
be no final exam.

  
  

Students taking this course as their EAS spring junior tutorial will prepare a
junior paper in place of the second paper. This paper can be on any topic in
the twentieth century history of Japan or concerning present-day Japan,
whether or not it is covered in the course. Daniel Aldrich will continue as
junior tutor and work with you throughout the semester to choose topics and
write the paper. I will be also consult with you on this throughout the
semester and introduce you to other faculty to give advice, depending on the
topic chosen. This term paper should be in the range of 20-30 pages. For
students planning to complete a senior honors project, it is advisable to use
this paper as an occasion to explore a possible thesis topic. For tutorial
students, the junior paper will count more heavily in the grade (50%).

  
  

**Readings:** All readings marked with " ***** " on the syllabus are available
on e-reserves and on regular reserve in the Harvard-Yenching Library. All
books marked with " ****** " are available for purchase at the Coop. A set of
documents from the forthcoming book, _Sources of Japanese Tradition_ (listed
as _SJT_ ) on the syllabus will be distributed in class. A list of books
available for purchase follows:

Gail Bernstein, _Recreating Japanese Women_ (U. Cal Press)

Ted Cook and Haruko Cook, _Japan at War_  (The New Press)

John Dower, _Embracing Defeat: Japan after WWII_ Parts I-III

Andrew Gordon, ed., _Postwar Japan as History_  (U. Cal Press)

**** Shtar Ishinomori, _Japan Inc_ (U. Cal Press)

Tessa Morris-Suzuki, _Reinventing Japan: Time, Space, Nation_ (M. E. Sharpe).

  
  

[For background for students with no prior study of Japan:

Peter Duus, _Modern Japan_ (Houghton Mifflin)

  
  

_Prerequisites: Open to history concentrators, EAS concentrators (counts for
junior tutorial credit, EAS 98) and all others with some background either in
history or study of Japan. Those with no background in the study of modern
Japan must do the bracketed readings from the textbook by Peter Duus. Open to
graduate students._

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  
  

E-reserves list, in order assigned:

  
  

Peter Duus, _Party Rivalry and Political Change_ , Chs. 1-2, pp. 1-49.

  
  

E.S. Crawcour, "Industrialization, 1880-1920" in Cambridge History of Japan,
Vol 6, 385-450.

  
  

Sheldon Garon, _The State and Labor in Japan_ , chs. 1-2, pp. 1-72.

  
  

Kenneth Pyle, "The Technology of Japanese Nationalism," in _Journal of Asian
Studies_ , Nov. 1974, pp. 51-65.

  
  

Carol Gluck, _Japan's Modern Myths_ , ch. 4, pp. 73-101

  
  

Ann Waswo, "In Search of Equity" in _Conflict in Modern Japanese History_ ,
pp. 366-411.

  
  

E. Taylor Atkins, _Blue Nippon_ chs. 2-3, pp. 45-127.

Harry Harootunian, "Figuring the Folk" in Stephen Vlastos, ed., _Mirror of
Modernity_ pp. 144-159.

  
  

Andrew Gordon, _Imperial Democracy_ Chs. 6-7, 9, pp. 144-203, 237-69.

  
  

Kerry Smith, "Rural Revitalization in the 1930s" (unpublished ms.)

  
  

Sheldon Garon, "State and Society in Interwar Japan," in Goldman and Gordon,
eds., _Historical Perspectives on Contemporary East Asia_ pp. 155-82.

  
  

Louise Young, _Total Empire_ , ch. 3, pp. 55-114.

  
  

Chalmers Johnson, _MITI and the Japanese Miracle_ , Chs. 3-6, pp. 83-156.

  
  

Herbert Bix, "Japan's Delayed Surrender: A Reinterpretation," in _Diplomatic
History_ (Spring, 1995) pp. 197-225.

  
  

Gordon, "Transwar through Postwar Japan" in Goldman and Gordon, _Historical
Perspectives on Contemporary East Asia_ , pp. 272-96.

  
  

Makoto Kumazawa, _Portraits of the Japanese Workplace_ , ch. 7, pp. 159-204

  
  

