  ![](genfa_s.jpg) |  History of Traditional Japan  
(HIST 3005/001)

Fall 2001 Syllabus  
Tuesday/Thursday 12:30-1:45  
Brewster D-103

* * *

John A. Tucker, Ph.D.  
Office hrs T/Th 10-12  Brewster A-304  
Work 328-1028/Home 756-4126  
[Tuckerjo@mail.ecu.edu](mailto: Tuckerjo@mail.ecu.edu) | ![](Pagoda_s.jpg)  
---|---|---  
  
[Severe weather
alerts](http://www.ecu.edu/oehs/emergencyprocedures/severeweather.htm)  
[Emergency alerts](http://www.ecu.edu/alert/)  
[emergency information hotline: 252-328-0062](http://www.ecu.edu/alert/)  
**Description:** This course surveys the development of civilization in Japan
from ancient times through the end of the sixteenth century. After briefly
examining the largely prehistoric beginnings of Japanese culture in the Jomon
and Yayoi periods, the course focuses on readings associated with the
introduction of Chinese civilization into Japan by way of Korea, and the
various responses to that civilization offered by Japanese from that point
forward. Without minimizing the Chinese impact, careful attention will be
devoted to ways in which the foreign bases of civilization were modified by
the Japanese, especially during the Nara, Heian, Kamakura, and Ashikaga
periods. While the intent of the course is to give students a firm basis for
understanding the foundations of Japanese culture, broader questions such as
the nature of civilization, cultural borrowing, and the extent to which
culture and civilization can or should be distinctive or unique, will also be
addressed.

**Quizzes, Exams & Grading: **There will be three exams (Sept. 20; Oct. 30;
and Dec. 4). The last exam will be given on the last day of class during the
regular semester. Each exam will count 20% of the final grade. The exams will
not be cumulative in the strict sense of the term, though students will be
expected to demonstrate mastery of the earlier information as is necessary to
compare and contrast the material studied insightfully. Exams will typically
include both "objective" (map identifications, true/false; multiple choice;
matching, etc) and essay components, though the latter will typically account
for the majority of the point value of the exam.

Brief quizzes will be given on a biweekly basis, and cumulatively will count
as 20% of the final grade. The quizzes are designed to ensure that students
master the details of Japanese history on a regular basis. Given that much of
the information integral to the study of Japanese history is utterly foreign
to beginning students, it is essential that students attempt to digest it in
reasonable increments. The quizzes, testing geographic details, familiarity
with names, events, etc., will typically be "objective" in nature. Those who
attend and participate meaningfully in class, read carefully and reflect upon
assigned readings, and review class lectures, discussions, and assigned
readings with an eye toward meaningful integration of the material, should
have no difficulties with the quizzes.

Students will also be expected to write a brief "thesis" paper (7-10 pp) on a
topic of their choosing, related to traditional Japanese history. More than
mere reports, these papers should seek to develop a thesis, defined by the
student, on the basis of their readings and in-class experiences with Japanese
history. One sample thesis, for example, would be "Buddhism was more of a
political force than a personal religious force in early Japanese history."
Another might be "Samurai were more influential as promoters of civilization
and peace than they were simple warriors." Often the thesis will develop as
students engage the readings meaningfully. Rather than choose a thesis in
advance of doing any of the readings, students are encouraged to allow their
thinking to unfold naturally with their progress in the course. It is
essential, given the limited resources available through Joyner Library, that
students choose their thesis on the basis of materials available, rather than
in isolation from them. Thesis papers are due on the last day of class,
December 4. Earlier submissions will be accepted.

Any student wishing to submit a draft for initial critique and subsequent
revision may do so. However, no "first draft" papers will be accepted after
the beginning of Thanksgiving break, November 21.

**Goals and Outcomes:** This course is the first half of a two-semester survey
history of Japan, and is meant primarily to prepare students for a more
meaningful appreciation of the development of modern Japanese history. At the
same time, the course seeks to provide for students an appreciation of the
fundamentals shaping Japanese culture and civilization, be they religious,
philosophical, economic, literary, linguistic, or artistic. Thus, by the end
of the semester students should have an understanding of the nature of
Japanese geography, Shinto, varieties of Japanese Buddhism, the essential
emphases of Japanese law, literature, and philosophy, as well as the key
components of Japanese language. Given this broad background in the
fundamentals, students who complete the course successfully should be able to
more insightfully assimilate new information and studies related to Japan.
Additionally, as is true with the study of any foreign culture, students
should have realized significantly more about themselves and their "own"
culture.

**Required Readings:** In order to relate contemporary news to Japanese
history, students will be given press handouts on a regular basis. Material in
them will be discussed in class, the stuff of quizzes, and possibly exams. In
addition, the following are the texts required for the course.

> H. Paul Varley, _Japanese Culture_. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press,
2000.

>

> Wm. Theodore de Bary et al., compilers. _Sources of Japanese Tradition,
Volume One: From Earliest Times to 1600_. New York: Columbia University Press,
2001.

>

> Ivan Morris. _The Nobility of Failure_. Tokyo: Tuttle Publishers, 1975.

Needless to say, students are encouraged to read extensively about Japan,
using the Joyner Library collection, interlibrary loan materials, postings on
the internet, or their personal library. For example, the following internet
sites provide daily news coverage of Japan, and are free for those who wish to
take advantage of them. [Japan Times](http://www.japantimes.co.jp/)   [Asahi
shinbun](http://www.asahi.com/english/english.html)   [Kyoto
News](http://www.kyoto-np.co.jp/kp/index_e.html)    [Daily
Yomiuri](http://www.yomiuri.co.jp/index-e.htm)    [Mainichi Daily
News](http://mdn.mainichi.co.jp/)     [Kansai Time
Out](http://www.kto.co.jp/index.html)

The following museum sites offer a host of information in English about
Japanese art, culture and civilization: [Tokyo National
Museum](http://www.tnm.go.jp/scripts/Index.en.idc)    [Kyoto National
Musuem](http://www.kyohaku.go.jp/indexe.htm)  [Nara National
Museum](http://www.narahaku.go.jp/)   [List of Japanese
Museums](http://www.dnp.co.jp/museum/icc-e.html)

At the same time, the three texts assigned must be read carefully since they
are the material on which students will be tested. Generally speaking,
students will not be expected to "know" details which appear only in the
readings assigned. However, any material that is mentioned in class and
appears in the readings will be considered fair game for the quizzes and
exams.

* * *

  
**Disabilities Statement:** East Carolina University seeks to comply fully
with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Students requesting
accommodations based on a covered disability must go to the Department for
Disability Support Services, located in Brewster A-117, to verify the
disability before any accommodations can occur.  The telephone number is
252-328-6799.  

* * *

**Schedule for Lectures & Discussion Topics**

[August 16: Introduction---Language, Geography, and the
People](http://core.ecu.edu/hist/tuckerjo/firstlec.htm)

[August 21/23: Ancient Japan: Jomon and Yayoi
Cultures](http://core.ecu.edu/hist/tuckerjo/secondlec.htm)

> > _Required Reading: Japanese Culture, ch. 1.[Nobility of Failure, ch.
1](http://core.ecu.edu/hist/tuckerjo/yamatotakeru.htm)._

>>

>> _Suggested Web site:[Japanese
Archeology](http://www.fcc.sophia.ac.jp/Faculty/Keally/japarch.html)_

> **_Please note: August 21 is the last day for late registration and schedule
changes._**

[August 28/30: Earliest Records---Japan in Chinese and Japanese historic
accounts](http://core.ecu.edu/hist/tuckerjo/thirdlec.htm)

> > _Required Reading:[SJT ch.
1](http://core.ecu.edu/hist/tuckerjo/SJT-1.htm). [Nobility of Failure, ch.
2](http://core.ecu.edu/hist/tuckerjo/yorozu.htm)._

[September 4/6: Indigenous Religiosity---
Shinto](http://core.ecu.edu/hist/tuckerjo/fourthlec.htm)

> > _Required Reading: SJT ch. 2. Nobility of Failure, ch. 3._

[September 11/13: The Impact of Chinese
Civilization](http://core.ecu.edu/hist/tuckerjo/fifthlec.htm)

> > _Required Reading: SJT chs. 3-4; Japanese Culture, ch. 2._

[September 18: Japan's Response to Chinese Civilization: The Nara
Period](http://core.ecu.edu/hist/tuckerjo/sixthlec.htm)

> > _Required Reading: SJT ch. 5._

**September 20: First Exam**

[September 25/27: Heian Japan---Politics and Religion in Tendai and Shingon
Buddhism](http://core.ecu.edu/hist/tuckerjo/seventhlec.htm)

> > _Required Reading: SJT chs. 6-8; Japanese Culture, ch. 3._

> **_Please note: September 26 is the last day for undergraduates to drop
semester-length courses or withdraw from school without grades._**

[October 2/4: Heian Japan---Literature and
Aesthetics](http://core.ecu.edu/hist/tuckerjo/eighthlec.htm)

> > _Required Reading: SJT ch. 9. Nobility of Failure, ch. 4._

[October 9/11: The New Medieval Order---Kamakura/Ashikaga Political
Culture](http://core.ecu.edu/hist/tuckerjo/ninthlec.htm)

> > _Required Reading: SJT chs. 11-12; Japanese Culture, ch. 4. Nobility ch.
5._

October 16: Last Day of Fall Break

[October 18: The New Medieval Religions---Pure
Land](http://core.ecu.edu/hist/tuckerjo/tenthlec.htm)

> > _Required Reading: SJT ch. 10. Nobility of Failure, ch. 6._

[October 23/25: The New Medieval Religions---Zen and
Nichiren](http://core.ecu.edu/hist/tuckerjo/eleventhlec.htm)

> > _Required Reading: SJT chs. 13-14._

**October 30: Second Exam**

[November 1: The New Medieval Religions---
Shinto](http://core.ecu.edu/hist/tuckerjo/twelfthlec.htm)

> > _Required Reading: SJT ch. 15.  _

[November 6/8: The New Medieval Aesthetics---Tea
Ceremony](http://core.ecu.edu/hist/tuckerjo/thirteenthlec.htm)

> > _Required Reading: SJT chs. 16-17; Japanese Culture, ch. 5._

[November 13/15: The New Medieval
Law](http://core.ecu.edu/hist/tuckerjo/fourteenthlec.htm)

> > _Required Reading: SJT ch. 18._

[November 20: Chaos and Reunification: Oda
Nobunaga](http://core.ecu.edu/hist/tuckerjo/fifteenthlec.htm)

> > _Required Reading: SJT ch. 19, pp. 433-458; Japanese Culture, ch. 6._

**November 22: Thanksgiving break**

[November 27/29: Chaos and Reunification: Toyotomi
Hideyoshi](http://core.ecu.edu/hist/tuckerjo/sixteenthlec.htm)

> > _Required Reading: SJT ch. 19, remainder; Nobility of Failure, ch. 7._

**December 4: Last Exam/Last Day of Class/Thesis Papers Due**

* * *

  
  
---  
  
    
    
    
    
    


