####

* * *

## Warriors at Peace

History 489H

#### Fall 2000



#### Mark Ravina

#### 115 Bowden

|

![](wave.gif)  
---|---  
  
* * *

#### Office hrs:

####  

|

#### Monday 2:00-4:00 and Friday 9:30-11:00

#### or by appointment  
  
---|---  
  
#### 727-4025

|

#### [histmr@emory.edu](mailto:histmr@emory.edu)  
  
* * *

#### Overview:

This is an upper-level colloquium on Japanese history focusing on the Japanese
warrior tradition from ancients times until the early modern era. There are no
prerequisites, but a previous course on Japan or on Asian history is strongly
recommended. Our primary concern will be the formation of Japanese government
and society in the early modern era. Politics in this period presents a
seeming paradox: although Japan was a peace it was ruled exclusively by
warriors. How did the warrior elite reconstruct and sustain their power over
Japan? Although we will focus on political events, we will address the broader
questions of how political power is shaped and constrained by social, economic
and intellectual forces.

#### Readings:

The following books are available at the bookstore.

> #### REQUIRED

>

> Donald Keene, trans., _Ch ushingura: The Treasury of Loyal Retainers_

>

> Hiroaki Sato, _Legends of the Samurai_

>

> Yamamoto Tsunetomo, William Williams trans, _Hagakure_

>

> #### SUGGESTED

>

> John, W. Hall, _Japan: From Prehistory to Modern Times_ (suggested)

>

> David J. Lu, _Japan: A Documentary History: Vols. 1_ (suggested)

>

> Ihara Saikaku, DeBary trans., _Five Women Who Loved Love_ (suggested)

>

> Walthall, Anne, _Peasant uprisings in Japan: a critical anthology of peasant
histories_ (suggested)

* * *

#### Grading:

Grades will be composed of class participation (50%) and a term paper (50%).
Class participation consists of the following: the extent and quality of your
comments in class, the quality of your presentations in class, and the quality
of your comments on other students' papers. Drafts are due on November 1.
Please bring ten copies of the paper to class since you will distribute thems
to the class. You will be expected to offer comments on these drafts on
November 8. Final papers are due on December 13 . This means papers are due on
December 13. December 17 would be late, as would January 12\. December 14 is
also late. Also, papers are due December 13. The paper must satsify the
History Department writing requirement, which you can find at
<http://www.emory.edu/HISTORY/ATLAS/paperreq.html>

#### Pronunciation:

Vowels in Japanese are pronounced as in Italian. Hence uomo, pasta, prego and
bambino should get you through most words. Alternately,

** **

**a** as in f ** _a_** ther

**e** as in **e** t cetera

**i** as in b **ee** t

**o** as in n **o** te

**u** as in b **oo** t



Vowels with macrons are lengthened, but otherwise remain unchanged. This is an
important distinction: kosho (kooshoo) means "negotiations," while kosho means
"broken."

Japanese family names come first. Thus, Ito Hirobumi is Mr. Ito, not Mr.
Hirobumi.

Romanized Japanese follows standard capitalization rules. Capitalize only
proper nouns. Do not arbitrarily capitalize "Samurai," or "Emperor."

* * *

#### SCHEDULE



#### Week one: (9/6) Introduction



#### Week two: (9/13): Ancient Warriors

> Hall, pp. 1-74

>

> Sato, pp.xiii-xxxv (skim), 3-15

>

> Lu, pp. 3-39.

>

> Morris, _Nobility of Failure_ , pp.1-40.

>

> **Questions:**

>

>> How does the ancient imperial line justify its rule?

>>

>> How does Chinese thought affect Japanese imperial legitimacy?

>>

>> To whom are warriors loyal?

>>

>> How do they manifest loyalty?

#### Week three : (9/20): Origins of the Samurai: Taira and Minamoto

> Hall, pp. 75-141.

>

> Sato, pp.110-188

>

> Lu, pp. 81-116.

>

> Morris, _Nobility of Failure_ , pp. 67-142.

>

> **Questions:**

>

>> What precipitated the rise of warrior power?

>>

>> What are the "feudal" institions" described by Lu and Hall?

>>

>> How does feudalism affect the imperial house?

>>

>> How does feudalism affect warriors?

>>

>> To whom are warriors loyal?

>>

>> How do they manifest loyalty?

#### Week four: (9/27): Medieval Society

> Ikegami, Taming of the Samurai, pp. 1-117

>

> **Questions** :

>

>> What is Ikegami's thesis about the rise of warrior power?

>>

>> Does it explain the primary source texts we read last week?

#### Week five: (10/4): Buddhism

> Nakamura, "The Basic Teaching of Buddhism," pp. 3-31

>

> Lu, pp. 51-69; 117-145.

>

> **Questions** :

>

>> What are the central tenets of Buddhism?

>>

>> What were the major schools of Buddhism in Japan?

>>

>> How did warriors reconcile killing with Buddhism?

>>

>> How did Buddhism support the warrior tradition?

#### Week six : (10/11): The Warring States era and warrior autonomy

> Ikegami, _Taming of the Samurai_ , pp. 121-48.

>

> Lu, pp. 147-95, esp. 171-95.

>

> Hall, pp. 88-159

>

> **Questions** :

>

>> How did shogun/daimyo relations change during the Warrings States era?

>>

>> How did this change the idea of loyalty?

>>

>> How did this change the legitimacy of warrior rule?

#### Week seven : (10/18): The Early Modern Order: Creating Samurai at Peace

> Lu, I: 171-228

>

> Yamamoto Tsunetomo, William Williams trans, _Hagakure_.

####  Week eight: (10/25): Samurai as Models

> Donald Keene, trans., _Ch ushingura: The Treasury of Loyal Retainers_

>

> Sato, pp. 304-338

#### Week nine: (11/1): Popular Mores

> Ihara Saikaku, DeBary trans. _Five Women Who Loved Love_

>

> **EXCHANGE OF DRAFTS**

>

> #### **DRAFTS must be paginated and must have a bibliography. Put your name
on your paper.**

####  Week ten: (11/8): Class discussion of drafts

#### Week eleven: (11/15): Early Modern Society: Ikegami's thesis

> Ikegami, _Taming of the Samurai_ , pp. 151-369

>

> **Questions** :

>

>> What is Ikegami's thesis about the rise of warrior power?

>>

>> Does it explain the primary sources we have read?

#### Week twelve: (11/22): NO CLASS

#### Week thirteen: (11/29): Angry Peasants

> Walthall, Anne, _Peasant uprisings in Japan: a critical anthology of peasant
histories_

####  Week fourteen: (12/6): Samurai Decadence/Commoner Decadence

> **CLASS WILL MEET AT PARK BENCH** (formerly Jaggers)

>

> "Benten the Thief" in Earle Ernst, _Three Japanese plays from the
traditional theatre._

>

>  
>

> * * *

Copyright 2000 Mark Ravina  
Last Updated September 1, 2000

[Emory Home](http://www.emory.edu/) | [History
Home](http://www.emory.edu/HISTORY/ATLAS/index.html) |
[Search](http://www.emory.edu/INDEX/) |
[Index](http://www.emory.edu/WWW/contents.html) |
[Help](http://www.emory.edu/WWW/help.html)



