![](/~core/images/shield.gif)|

![Core Curriculum](/~core/images/core-curriculum-hs.gif)  
  
---|---  
  
[Core Home](/~core/index.html)  
[Announcements](/~core/announce.html)(7/29/02)  
  
[Core Curriculum Guide for students who entered between September 1999 and
September 2002](/~core/redbook.html)  
  
[7-Course Core Requirement Form](/~core/7course_form.html)  
  
[Core Curriculum Guide for students who enter in September 2002 and
thereafter](/~core/redbook_2002.html)  
  
_Areas_  
  [Foreign Cultures](/~core/areas/01-02/fc/index.html)  
  [Historical Studies](/~core/areas/01-02/hs/index.html)  
  [Literature & Arts](/~core/areas/01-02/la/index.html)  
  [Moral Reasoning](/~core/areas/01-02/mr/index.html)  
  [Quantitative Reasoning](/~core/areas/01-02/qr/index.html)  
  [Science](/~core/areas/01-02/sci/index.html)  
  [Social Analysis](/~core/areas/01-02/sa/index.html)  

(C) 2000, President and Fellows  
of Harvard University

|  

[[Description](/~core/descriptions/00-01/hs/index.html#hsa14)] [[Course
Site](/~hsa14/)]

## Historical Studies A-14  
Japan: Tradition and Transformation

### Mikael Adolphson

Spring 2001

Historical Studies A-14

**JAPAN:   TRADITION AND TRANSFORMATION**

**www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~hsa14**

|

MW(F) 10

|

Professor Mikael Adolphson  
  
---|---  
  
Harvard Hall 201

|

Professor Andrew Gordon  
  
            This course will examine the traditions and transformations that have shaped Japanese society throughout history. On this journey of centuries and millennia, students will learn about institutions, ideas and the peoples of Japan's exciting past through lectures, discussions and the reading of selected literary documents as well as historical writings.  By engaging in a dialogue with the past, we will also be able to see how the past lives in the present, while, on the other hand, we realize that attitudes and ideas of the present affect the way that the past is represented, as evidenced by popular images of the samurai and the ninja. 

Japan's modern history presents one of the more striking transformation in
world history.  The reworking, and indeed in crucial aspects, the invention of
new Japanese traditions in the modern era is a crucial aspect of the
tumultuous changes in Japan from the mid-1880s through the present.  As we
examine these transformations, we will see how, for better and sometimes for
worse, people in Japan since the mid-19th century have come to share in the
dilemmas of modernity that challenge us all.

**REQUIRED READINGS:   **All books have been ordered in paperback at the Coop
as well as placed on reserve in Hilles and Lamont libraries.  The Sourcebook,
which is available for purchase in the Science Center, is also on reserve in
Hilles and Lamont libraries.

1.  Mason and Caiger.  _A History of Japan_.   Rutland: Tuttle, revised edition, 1997.

2.  Duus, Peter.  _Modern Japan_.   Boston: Houghton Mifflin, second edition, 1998.

3.  Katsu Kokichi.  _Musui's Story: The Autobiography of a Tokugawa Samurai_.   Translated by Teruko Craig. Phoenix: University of Arizona Press, 1988.

4.  Natsume Soseki.  _Kokoro_.   Translated by Edwin McClellan.  Chicago: Regnery Gateway, 1957.

     [full text can also be found on the web at: _http://www.eldritchpress.org/ns/soseki.html_ ]

5.  Ronald Dore.  _Stock Market Capitalism: Welfare Capitalism, Japan and Germany versus the Anglo-Saxons_. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.

6.  Sourcebook, Historical Studies A-14, Spring 2001.

**ASSESSMENT:   **The course grade will be based on the following:

Mid-term (hour) exam:

|

20%  
  
---|---  
  
Papers (2):

|

20% each  
  
Final exam:

|

25%  
  
Section participation:

|

15%  
  


**EXAMS:   **The **Midterm Examination** , covering the lectures and all
assigned readings to date will be administered on **Monday, March 12**.   The
**Final Examination** is tentatively scheduled for **Thursday, May 17**.

**PAPERS:**    Students will write two 5-8 page essays.  Papers are due on
**Friday, March 23** , and

**Friday, April 27**.   Further details will be presented in sections.

**SECTIONS:**

Sections are an integral part of the course, and attendance is mandatory.
Students are required to complete the assigned readings, post comments or
questions to the course web discussion forum, and come to section prepared to
discuss the readings.  First section meetings will take place during Week 2
(February 8-9).

Students should sign up for section at:
_[http://www.section2.fas.harvard.edu](http://www.section2.fas.harvard.edu/)_  

All scheduling difficulties should be directed to **Head Teaching Fellow,
Stacie Matsumoto** at
_[matsumot@fas.harvard.edu](mailto:matsumot@fas.harvard.edu)_.   Section
leader office hours will be announced at the first section meetings.

**FILM SCREENINGS:**   Two films will be shown during the course of the
semester.  The first film **"Soldiers and Chocolate"** will be screened on
**Tuesday, April 10 at 7pm** in the Yenching auditorium, 2 Divinity Avenue.
The second film **"Ikiru"** (directed by Akira Kurosawa) will be screened on
**Tuesday, April 24 at 7pm** in the Yenching auditorium, 2 Divinity Avenue.  

Students are expected to attend these screenings or otherwise view the films
on reserve at the Learning Resources Center in the 6th floor of Lamont library
as they will be discussed during section meetings in conjunction with the
readings for the week.

**OFFICE HOURS:**

Students are encouraged to come see the instructors with questions about any
aspect of the course.

**Professor Mikael Adolphson**

|

**Professor Andrew Gordon**  
  
---|---  
  
Office hours:  M 1-3, Tu 10-11 or by appt.

|

Office hours:  M 3-5 or by appt.  
  
2 Divinity Avenue, Room 227

|

Coolidge Hall, Room 319  
  
Phone:  495-8363

|

Phone:  495-3220  
  
E-mail: _[adolphs@fas.harvard.edu](mailto:adolphs@fas.harvard.edu)_

|

E-mail:  _[agordon@fas.harvard.edu](mailto:agordon@fas.harvard.edu)_  
  
  

**LECTURE SCHEDULE:**

**I.   PRE-MODERN TRADITIONS (Weeks 1-6)**

Jan 31

|

 (W)

|

Introduction

|

 [MA/AG]  
  
---|---|---|---  
  
Feb  2

|

(F)

|

Peopling the Archipelago

|

 [MA]  
  
  |   |   |  
  
Feb  5

|

(M)

|

Conquering the Islands: Early State Formation

|

[MA]  
  
Feb  7

|

(W)

|

The Completion of the Japanese Imperial State

|

[MA]  
  
  |   |   |  
  
Feb 12

|

(M)

|

Courtier Rulership in the Heian Age (794-1185)

|

[MA]  
  
Feb 14

|

(W)

|

Heian Refinements and Religions

|

 [MA]  
  
  |   |   |  
  
Feb 19 (M)

|

HOLIDAY

|   |  
  
Feb 21

|

(W)

|

The Rise of the Warrior Class

|

[MA]  
  
Feb 23

|

(F)

|

Warrior Rulership

|

 [MA]  
  
  |   |   |  
  
Feb 26

|

(M)

|

Everyday Life in Medieval Japan

|

 [MA]  
  
Feb 28

|

(W)

|

The Culture of War and the Southern Barbarians

|

[MA]  
  
  |   |   |  
  
Mar  5

|

(M)

|

The Tokugawa Polity

|

[MA]  
  
Mar  7

|

(W)

|

City Life and Commerce in Tokugawa Japan

|

[MA]  
  
**II.   MODERN TRANSFORMATIONS (Weeks 7-14)**

Mar 12

|

(M) **  **

|

**MIDTERM EXAM**

|  
---|---|---|---  
  
Mar 14

|

(W)

|

Creating a Nation-State

|

[AG/MA]  
  
Mar 16

|

(F)

|

Generating Capitalism

|

[AG]  
  
Mar 19

|

(M)

|

Political Struggles:  Who Belongs?

|

 [AG]  
  
Mar 21

|

(W)

|

Cultural Struggles:  Defining Modern Japan

|

 [AG]  
  
SPRING BREAK

Apr  2

|

(M)

|

Empire and Democracy

|

 [AG]  
  
---|---|---|---  
  
Apr  4

|

(W)

|

Traumas of Modern Economy and Society

|

 [AG]  
  
  |   |   |  
  
Apr   9

|

(M)

|

Total War

|

 [AG]  
  
Apr 11

|

(W)

|

Total Defeat

|

 [AG]  
  
  |   |   |  
  
Apr 16

|

(M)

|

Economy: From Recovery to Miracle to Mess

|

 [AG]  
  
Apr 18

|

(W)

|

Citizen, State, Democracy in Contemporary Japan

|

 [AG]  
  
  |   |   |  
  
Apr 23

|

(M)

|

Middle Class Life for Everyone?

|

 [AG]  
  
Apr 25

|

(W)

|

Media and Society: Marrying the Princess

|

[AG]  
  
  |   |   |  
  
Apr 30

|

(M)

|

Japan and the World

|

 [AG]  
  
May  2

|

(W)

|

Issues for the 21st century and beyond

|

 [AG]  
  
May  4

|

(F)

|

Wrapping Up

|

 [MA/AG]  
  
**REQUIRED READINGS**   (*=book available for purchase in Coop)

_Week 1:   Origins  (no section meeting)_

            *Mason & Caiger, _A History of Japan_ , pp. 19-24.

            Hall, John W., _Japan from Prehistory to Modern Times_ (University of Michigan Press), 

                        Chapters 2-4 in Sourcebook (SB pp. 1-13).

_Week 2:   The Early Japanese State  (sections on Feb. 8-9)_

            *Mason & Caiger, pp. 25-63.

            Tsunoda, De Bary, & Keene, _Sources of Japanese Tradition_ , pp.12-33.  (SB pp. 15-26)

_Week 3:   The Classical Age  (sections on Feb. 15-16)_

            *Mason & Caiger, pp. 64-117.

            _The Tale of Genji_ , "Yugao" and "Firefly" chapters.  (SB pp. 27-39; 41-46)

            Gossamer Journal selections.  (SB pp. 47-60  )

            _Tales of Times Now Past_ , selections.  (SB pp. 61-69)

_Week 4:   The Rise of the Warrior Class  (sections on Feb. 22-23)_

            *Mason & Caiger, pp. 121-143.

            "The Tale of H¨­gen" (SB pp. 71-131)

_Week 5:   Medieval Cultures  (sections on Mar. 1-2)_

            *Mason & Caiger, pp. 144-189.

            Noh Play:  "Tomoe"  (SB pp. 133-138)

            Lu, David, "The Development of Feudal Institutions through the Muromachi period," 

> "From Civil Wars to Unification"  (SB pp. 139-166)

_Week 6:   Tokugawa Japan  (sections on Mar. 8-9)_

            *Mason & Caiger, pp. 190-253.

            * _Musui's Story_.

            Ikegami Eiko, "Vendetta of the Forty-seven Samurai"  (SB pp. 167-177 )

_Week 7:   Japan's Modern Revolution I  (sections on Mar. 15-16)_

            *Duus, _Modern Japan_ , Chs. 3-5, 9.

            Smith, "Japan's Aristocratic Revolution"  (SB pp. 179-186)

            Fukuzawa, _An Encouragement of Learning_ , selections  (SB pp. 187-197)

_Week 8:   Japan's Modern Revolution II  (sections on Mar. 22-23)_

            *Duus, _Modern Japan_ , Chs. 6-8.

            Natsume Soseki, "My Individualism"  (SB pp. 199-219)

            *Natsume Soseki, _Kokoro_

_Week 9:   The Rise of Imperial Japan  (sections on Apr. 5-6)_

            *Duus, _Modern Japan_ , Chs. 10-12.

            Gordon, "The Crowd and Politics in Imperial Japan"  (SB pp. 221-236)

_Week 10:   Imperial Japan at War  (sections on Apr. 12-13)_

            *Duus, _Modern Japan_ , Chs. 13-14.

            Dower, "The Useful War"  (SB pp. 237-248)

  |

**Film screening:**

|

**"Soldiers and Chocolate"   **  
  
---|---|---  
  |   |

**7pm, Tuesday, April 10 in 2 Divinity Avenue auditorium**  
  
_Week 11:   Postwar Economy and Polity  (sections on Apr. 19-20)_

            *Duus, _Modern Japan_ , Chs. 15-18.

            *Dore, _Stock Market Capitalism_ , Chs. 1-2.

_Week 12:   Postwar Society  (sections on Apr. 26-27)_

            _Salad Anniversary_ (poems)   (SB pp. 249-263)

            Sakaiya Taichi, "The Baby Boom Generation" & Shimizu Ikko, "Silver Sanctuary" 

> (SB pp. 265-283; 285-297)

>

> Kumazawa, "Twenty Years of a Bank Worker's Life."  (SB pp. 299-320)

>

> Curtis, "The Liberal Democratic Party: Perpetuating Dominance" (SB pp.
321-338)

            Ruoff, "Mr. Tomino Goes to City Hall"  (SB pp. 339-351)

  |

**Film screening:   **

|

**"Ikiru" (directed by Akira Kurosawa)**  
  
---|---|---  
  |   |

**7pm, Tuesday, April 24 in 2 Divinity Avenue auditorium**  
  
_Week 13:   Contemporary Japan and Future (sections May 3-4)_

            *Duus, _Modern Japan_ , Chs. 19-20.

            *Dore, _Stock Market Capitalism_ , Chs. 3, 6-7, 11. ****



