[Click here to see History B.A. Degree Requirements](histreq.htm)  
[Click here to see History B.A., Historic Preservation Concentration Degree
Requirements](histpres.htm)  
[Click here to see History B.A., Pre-Law Concentration Degree
Requirements](law_hist.htm)

#  History Course Descriptions

*General Education Courses 

**Writing Intensive

*History 100. FOUNDATIONS OF WESTERN CIVILIZATION. An introduction to the foundations of Western Civilization from the Dawn of Man through the Reformation, with an emphasis on the political, economic, social, intellectual, and cultural attributes which made that civilization unique. 3 credits. TO SEE RECENT HIST 100 SYLLABI, CLICK ON ONE OF THE FOLLOWING:  [Crowl](http://www.longwood.edu/staff/jcrowl/hist100.htm)  [Munson](jm100f98.htm)

*History 110. MODERN WESTERN CIVILIZATION. A survey of the development of Modern Western Civilization from the Age of Absolutism to the present, with emphasis upon the political, economic, social, cultural, and intellectual attributes which have marked its rise to world-wide influence in the Twentieth Century. 3 credits. TO SEE RECENT HIST 110 SYLLABI, CLICK ON ONE OF THE FOLLOWING:   [Crowl](http://www.longwood.edu/staff/jcrowl/hist110.htm)[ ](jc110s99.htm)[Munson ](http://www.longwood.edu/staff/jmunson/MCSYLs2000.html)[Munson (Honors Section)](http://www.longwood.edu/staff/jmunson/HmCVSYL2000.htm)  [Sneller](ms110s2000.html)

*History 200. HISTORY OF CHINA. Chinese political, social, and cultural history from earliest times to the present, with an emphasis on the modern period. 3 credits. [CROWL](faculty.htm#Crowl)   
CLICK [HERE](jc200f98.htm) TO VIEW A RECENT HIST 200 SYLLABUS

*History 221, 222. UNITED STATES HISTORY. An introductory course in United States history. (History 221: Colonial Foundations to 1877; History 222: 1877 to Modern Times.) 3 credits.   
CLICK  [HERE](H121SYLF99.html)TO SEE RECENT HIST 221 SYLLABI (Hall)  
TO SEE RECENT HIST 222 SYLLABI, CLICK ON ONE OF THE FOLLOWING:
[Hall](mh222s99.html)

History 295. SPECIAL TOPICS. Offered on demand. 3 credits.

History 300 (Political Science 300). TEACHING HISTORY AND THE SOCIAL SCIENCES
IN THE SECONDARY SCHOOL. A study of the nature of disciplines from which
content in the social sciences is drawn for instruction at the secondary level
and of the relationship between the nature of these disciplines and the
planning of instruction. Observation and participation in the work of selected
secondary school classrooms is required. This course does not count toward the
completion of the 37 credits stipulated under History Major, B.A. Degree (C.
Major Requirements), page 156. Prerequisites: Education 245 and 260. 3
credits. [WELCH](faculty.htm#welch)

History 301. AMERICAN COLONIAL HISTORY. The English North American colonies
from 1607 to 1783, with emphasis upon fundamental aspects of colonial
development, the causes of the American Revolution, and interpretation of the
period. Prerequisite: History 221 or permission of instructor. 3 credits.
[WELCH](Faculty.htm#welch) ![](jefferson.gif) History 302. THE EARLY NATIONAL
PERIOD OF THE UNITED STATES. The United States from the adoption of the
Constitution of 1787 through the Mexican War. Political institutions and
practice, economic growth, reform movements, and westward expansion are
emphasized. Prerequisite: History 221 or permission of instructor. 3 credits.
[COLES](faculty.htm#coles)  
CLICK [HERE](rp302f98.html) TO VIEW A RECENT HIST 302 SYLLABUS
![](lincoln.jpg)![](davislr.gif) History 303. CIVIL WAR AND RECONSTRUCTION.
The United States from the close of the Mexican War to the Compromise of 1877.
The constitutional, political, economic, social and military aspects of the
period are emphasized. Prerequisite: History 221 or permission of instructor.
3 credits. [COLES ](faculty.htm#coles)CLICK [HERE](rp303s99.html) TO SEE A
RECENT HIST 303 SYLLABUS

History 304. THE EMERGENCE OF MODERN AMERICA. The United States from the
Compromise of 1877 to the First World War. The Industrial Revolution and its
consequences, the rise of the nation to world power, and the birth of modern
reformism are emphasized. Prerequisite: History 222 or permission of
instructor. 3 credits. [HALL](faculty.htm#Hall)

History 305. MODERN AMERICA, 1914-1945. The course offers a study of the
United States in the pivotal eras of the First and Second World Wars and the
Great Depression. Prerequisite: History 222. 3 credits.
[HALL](faculty.htm#Hall)CLICK [HERE](H305SSYL.html) TO SEE A RECENT HIST 305
SYLLABUS

History 306. MODERN AMERICA, 1945-Present. The course offers a study of the
United States from the end of World War II to the present. The main emphasis
will be on domestic affairs such as the economy, social conditions, religion,
politics, and intellectual life. Prerequisite: History 222. 3 credits.
[SNELLER](faculty.htm#Sneller)CLICK [HERE](ms306s99.htm) TO SEE A RECENT HIST
306 SYLLABUS

History 307. UNITED STATES DIPLOMATIC HISTORY TO 1898. American foreign
relations from the Revolutionary era to the Spanish-American War.
Prerequisite: History 221 or permission of instructor. 3 credits. STAFF

History 308. UNITED STATES DIPLOMATIC HISTORY FROM 1898. American foreign
relations and diplomatic activities from the Spanish-American War to the
present. Prerequisite: History 222 or permission of instructor. 3 credits.
[SNELLER](faculty.htm#Sneller)

**History 309. AMERICAN SOCIAL AND INTELLECTUAL HISTORY. The major
developments in American thought and culture from the Colonial era through the
Civil War. Puritanism, the Enlightenment, and the Romantic Movement are
emphasized. Prerequisite: History 221 or permission of instructor. 3 credits.
STAFF

**History 310. AMERICAN SOCIAL AND INTELLECTUAL HISTORY. The major
developments in American thought and culture since the Civil War. Social
Darwinism, liberal reform and conservative reaction, the affluent society, and
the counter-culture are emphasized. Prerequisite: History 221 or permission of
instructor. 3 credits. STAFF ![](anthony.gif) History 311. THE HISTORY OF
WOMEN IN AMERICA. The changing role of women in American life from the
Colonial era to the present, contrasting the ideology of women's place in
society with the reality of their lives. The Victorians, the fight for women's
suffrage, and the 20th-century liberation movement are emphasized.
Prerequisite: History 222 or permission of instructor. 3 credits.
[WELCH](Faculty.htm#welch)

History 312. THE AMERICAN WEST. The trans-Mississippi west with emphasis on
19th-century exploration and settlement, including the Indian barrier, and the
mining, cattle, and farming frontiers. Prerequisite: History 222 or permission
of instructor. 3 credits.  [WELCH](Faculty.htm#welch)

History 313. HISTORY THROUGH FILM. A viewing of some fourteen films that
contain historical interpretation. Reviews and discussions with historians as
to interpretation will follow. The class will meet once a week. 3 credits.
STAFF

**History 314. (Political Science 314). POLITICAL HISTORY OF AFRICA. A survey
of the political landscape of African history. A major portion of the course
examines the significance of precolonial kingdoms, assesses the growth of the
"slave trade", analyzes African intellectual history, and explores the "eve of
colonialism" in Africa. 3 credits. [TLOU](faculty.htm#Tlou)

History 317. INTRODUCTION TO HISTORIC PRESERVATION. The evolution of
architectural styles in the United States from the Colonial Era to the early
20th century, with emphasis upon the principal periods of architectural
development, the major styles and furnishings, and the basic techniques and
terminology of historic preservation. Prerequisite: History 221 and 222\. 3
credits.  [WELCH](Faculty.htm#welch)

**History 318. INTRODUCTION TO MUSEUM STUDIES. An introduction to the field of
museology, covering the history, philosophy, and ethics of the profession;
various types of museums and different aspects of museum work; the museum's
role in the community; and the effects of philanthropy and government on
museums. Designed primarily for those concentrating in historic preservation.
Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor. 3 credits. STAFF

**History 320. AFRICAN AMERICAN HISTORY. A survey of the black experience in
America from the Colonial Era to the present. Prerequisite: History 221 or
permission of instructor. 3 credits.  
[COLES](faculty.htm#coles)

**History 325. HISTORY OF LATIN AMERICA. A survey of Latin American history
from its pre-Columbian roots to the present. 3
credits.[COLES](faculty.htm#coles)  
CLICK [HERE](Rp325syl.htm) TO VIEW A RECENT HIST 325 SYLLABUS

**History 336. HISTORY OF JAPAN. Japanese political and cultural history with
emphasis upon the modern period. The opening of Japan, the Meiji Restoration,
modernization, the rise of militarism, the American occupation, and current
issues are stressed. 3 credits. [SNELLER](faculty.htm#Sneller)

**History 351. MEDIEVAL EUROPE. A study of the political, economic, and social
institutions, and the religious and intellectual developments in Medieval
Europe. 3 credits. [MILLAR](faculty.htm#Millar)

**History 352. RENAISSANCE AND REFORMATION. The social, cultural, religious,
economic, and political forces which shaped Western Civilization from the High
Middle Ages through the era of the religious wars (ca. 1300-1648). 3 credits.
[MILLAR](faculty.htm#Millar) ![](newguill3.JPG) **History 354. THE FRENCH
REVOLUTION AND NAPOLEON. A study of the origins and course of the French
revolutionary era, with emphasis upon its profound political, economic,
social, institutional, and intellectual significance. 3 credits.
[MUNSON](Faculty.htm#Munson)  
CLICK  [HERE](jm354f98.htm)TO VIEW A RECENT HIST 354 SYLLABUS.
![](bismark.gif) **History 355. EUROPE IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY, 1815-1914.
The political, economic, social, and cultural development of Europe from the
Congress of Vienna to the eve of World War I. 3 credits.
[MUNSON](faculty.htm#Munson)  


**History 356. EUROPE IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY, 1900 TO THE PRESENT. The
political, economic, social, and intellectual development of Europe in its
world setting since the turn of the century. 3 credits.
[CROWL](faculty.htm#Crowl)CLICK [HERE](Jc356s99.htm) TO SEE A RECENT HIST 356
SYLLABUS

**History 357. ENGLAND BEFORE THE TUDORS, 55 B.C. TO 1485. A study of the
political, economic, and social factors which shaped England prior to the
Reformation. 3 credits. [MILLAR](faculty.htm#Millar)

**History 358. FRANCE SINCE 1815. The history of major developments in French
politics, culture and society in the modern era. 3 credits.
[MUNSON](faculty.htm#Munson)

**History 359. RUSSIAN HISTORY TO 1894. Russia from the Kievan period to
Alexander III, with emphasis upon the modernization efforts of Peter the Great
and Catherine the Great, the reforms of Alexander II, and the 19th century
revolutionary movement. 3 credits. [CROWL](faculty.htm#Crowl)  
CLICK [HERE](http://www.longwood.edu/staff/jcrowl/hist359.htm) TO SEE A RECENT
HIST 359 SYLLABUS

**History 360. RUSSIAN HISTORY SINCE 1894. Russia from the reign of Nicholas
II to the present, with emphasis upon the factors leading to the collapse of
the monarchy and the revolutions of 1905 and 1917, and upon the subsequent
construction and evolution of the Soviet system. Little emphasis upon
diplomacy or foreign policy. 3 credits. [CROWL](faculty.htm#Crowl)  
CLICK[ HERE ](http://www.longwood.edu/staff/jcrowl/hist360.htm)TO VIEW A
RECENT HIST 360 SYLLABUS

![](St-berna.jpg) History 361. HOW GREAT GENERALS WIN. An examination of how
great commanders from Hannibal to Douglas MacArthur have applied fundamental
principles of strategy to achieve victory in war, and how these principles
have remained constant despite changing historical circumstances. 3 credits.
[ALEXANDER](faculty.htm#Alexander)

History 362. WARFARE IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY. An examination of how
conventional warfare, with emphasis on massive armies, great destruction, and
total victory, has led to long wars of attrition and stalemate. The course
emphasizes the replacement of conventional warfare with guerilla,
unconventional, or limited warfare as means of achieving national aims. 3
credits. [ALEXANDER](faculty.htm#Alexander)

History 401. DIRECTED READING IN HISTORY. Must be approved by the head of the
department, 2 credits.

**History 402. AMERICAN HISTORIOGRAPHY. The writing and interpretation of
American history. Recommended for history majors. Prerequisite: History 221
and 222. 3 credits. [HALL](faculty.htm#Hall)  
CLICK [HERE](mh40298f.html) TO VIEW A RECENT HIST 402 SYLLABUS

**History 404. VIRGINIA HISTORY. Survey of the political development of
Virginia from 1607 to the Revolution. Prerequisite: History 221 and 222 or
permission of instructor. 3 credits.  [WELCH](Faculty.htm#welch)

**History 405. VIRGINIA HISTORY. Virginia political and institutional history
from the Revolution to the present. Research topics. Prerequisite: History 221
and 222 or permission of instructor. 3 credits.  [WELCH](Faculty.htm#welch)

**History 406. THE OLD SOUTH. The basic political, economic, social, and
intellectual institutions, forces, and problems which collectively shaped the
antebellum South. Prerequisite: History 221 or permission of instructor. 3
credits.[COLES](faculty.htm#coles) ![](Declar.gif) History 455 (Political
Science 455). CONSTITUTIONAL HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES. Intensive case-
study examination of the continuing development of the Constitution. Emphasis
on judiciary, presidency, federalism, commerce, and due process problems. 3
credits. [CALIHAN](faculty.htm#Calihan)

History 460, 461. HISTORY SEMINAR. Offered on demand; open to junior and
senior history majors. 1 credit.

**History 461. SENIOR SEMINAR. Capstone course in history. Research, writing,
and assessment of student outcomes. Required of majors in history. 1 credit.
[CROWL](faculty.htm#Crowl)  
CLICK[ HERE](http://www.longwood.edu/staff/jcrowl/hist461.htm) TO VIEW A
RECENT HIST 461 SYLLABUS

**History 463. EUROPEAN HISTORIOGRAPHY. The writing and interpretation of
history in Europe since the Renaissance. Prerequisite: History 110, or
permission of instructor. 3 credits.

**History 465. TUDOR-STUART ENGLAND, 1485-1714. The social, political,
economic, and religious forces of one of England's most dynamic periods
examined in the context of the 16th-century Renaissance Reformation and the
17th- century Intellectual Revolution. Research paper or critical book
analyses required. Background in Western Civilization recommended. 3 credits.
[MILLAR](faculty.htm#Millar)

**History 466. GEORGIAN ENGLAND, 1714-1815. England in the 18th century, with
emphasis upon political, social, and cultural trends. Topical reports by
students. 3 credits. STAFF

**History 468. EUROPEAN INTELLECTUAL HISTORY FROM THE ENLIGHTENMENT. A survey
of the major trends in European thought after the Enlightenment, and the
relationship of these trends to their social, cultural, and political context.
Prerequisite: History 110 or permission of instructor. 3 credits.
[MUNSON](faculty.htm#Munson)  
CLICK [HERE](http://www.longwood.edu/staff/jmunson/INTSYL2000.htm) TO VIEW A
RECENT HIST 468 SYLLABUS

History 469. (Political Science 469). SOVIET DIPLOMACY. An analysis of the
diplomacy and foreign policy of Soviet Russia, 1917 to 1991, with emphasis
upon the political machinery and motivating forces which determine foreign
policy. 3 credits. [CALIHAN](faculty.htm#Calihan) ![](0998_1.jpg) History 475,
476, 477, 478, 479. INTERNSHIPS IN HISTORIC PRESERVATION. Open to qualified
seniors in Historic Preservation Concentration. 475/3 credits; 476/6 credits;
477/9 credits; 478/12 credits; 479/15 credits. [WELCH](Faculty.htm#welch)

History 490, 491. HISTORY SEMINAR. Offered on demand; open to junior and
senior history majors. 3 credits.

History 495. SPECIAL TOPICS IN HISTORY. Offered on demand. 3 credits.  

* * *

  
[Return to History and Political Science Department Homepage](home.htm)  
[Return to History Program Page](history.htm)

