> > # HIS 159B Syllabus

>>

>> #### Description  
>  Requirements  
>  Week by Week  
>  [Home](index.htm)

>

> ## Description

>

> #### [[Back to Top](syllabus.htm)]

>

> #### This course covers the social, political and cultural history of the
people of Japan from the nineteenth century to the present. We will examine
such topics as the establishment of the modern Japanese state and emperor
system, "modernization" and debates regarding its direction, the changing
status of women, the rise of Japanese imperialism, World War II, the U.S.
Occupation, high growth economics, protest movements in the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries, and current discussions regarding economic recession and
military rearmament. Our emphasis will be on a diversity of historical
experiences and struggles shaping Japanese society.

>

> ## Requirements

>

> #### [[Back to Top](syllabus.htm)]

>

>> #### 1\. Attendance

>>

>> #### a. Attendance (lecture and discussion section) is mandatory and will
be checked. If you miss more than three lectures and one discussion section
without ADVANCE notice and permission during the term, it will be noted in and
have an impact on your final evaluation. On the other hand, IF YOU MEET THE
STANDARD ABOVE YOU WILL BE ELIGIBLE TO TAKE A SHORT VERSION OF THE FINAL EXAM.

>>

>> #### b. Choose one discussion section (either W 8:00-9:10 AM Soc Sci 2 159
or M 7:00-8:10 PM J Baskin Engineer 372) and stay with it; you must consult
with the teaching assistant if you need to change at any point.

>>

>> #### c. You must bring your own copies of the readings to each discussion
section.

>>

>> #### 2\. Weekly Response Papers

>>

>> #### a. The response papers will be 1-2 pages long. They must be typed,
proofread, coherent and engaged directly with the assigned topic and readings.

>>

>> #### b. Think of the response papers as a way of keeping up with the
reading, preparation for discussion in section, and exercising your writing
skills.

>>

>> #### c. The papers will be graded on a plus (excellent), check (good), and
minus (satisfactory) basis

>>

>> #### d. You must write response papers for 4 of 8 weekly topics during the
quarter.

>>

>> #### 3\. Exams

>>

>> #### a. The mid-term exam will be held in-class. It will basically consist
of a map quiz, identifications, and a short essay. A study guide will be
handed out beforehand.

>>

>> #### b. The final will be a take-home exam. It will consist of two essay
questions, 5-7 pages long. The questions will be handed out two weeks before
the end of classes. The final will be due Monday, June 3 by 4 PM. Turn in at
my office or my mailbox in Merrill Faculty Services.

>>

>> #### 4\. Overall grading:

>>

>> #### a. Attendance and participation (20%)

>>

>> #### b. Response papers (20%)

>>

>> #### c. Mid-term (30%)

>>

>> #### d. Final (30%)

>

> #### 5\. Required Texts

>

>> #### Kenneth Pyle, _The Making of Modern Japan_

>>

>> #### John Dower, _Japan in War and Peace_

>>

>> #### Reading Packet

>>

>> #### * Books are available for purchase at the Literary Guillotine, located
downtown at 204 Locust Street (457-1195).

>>

>> #### * Reading packet is available from Slug Books (in 7-Eleven mini-mall
at base of campus, 469-7584).

>

> ## Readings Week by Week

>

> #### [[Back to Top](syllabus.htm)]

>

> ####  
>

> #### Week One: Tokugawa Japan (3/27-3/29)

>

> #### Pyle, Chapters 1-3

>

> ####  
>

> #### Week Two: The Meiji Restoration (4/1-4/5)

>

> #### Pyle, Chapters 4-5

>

> #### READING PACKET:

>

> #### 1) Various letters in section entitled "Coming of the American Fleet,
1853-1854" in Meiji Japan Through Contemporary Sources 2

>

> #### 2) Broadsheets in Japanese Discovery of America

>

> #### Movie suggestion: IMAMURA Shohei, "Eija nai ka" (Spirited and graphic
depiction of the turbulence preceding the Meiji Restoration from the
perspective of commoners)

>

> ####  
>

> #### Week Three: Civilization and Enlightenment (4/8-4/12)

>

> #### Pyle, Chapters 6 and 7

>

> ####  
>

> #### READING PACKET:

>

> #### 1) Hane, Chapter 1 ("Modernization")

>

> #### 2) FUKUZAWA Yukichi, "On De-Asianization" in Meiji Japan Through
Contemporary Sources 3

>

> #### 3) "Proposal of Okubo Toshimichi Concerning Industrial Enterprises for
Increasing Production, May or June, 1874" in Meiji Japan Through Contemporary
Sources 3

>

> #### 4) Selections from Journal of Enlightenment regarding the status of
women

>

> #### Optional: Hane, Chapter 2 ("Farming")

>

> #### Movie suggestion: Animated version of "Maihime (The Dancing Girl)" by
MORI Ogai (Reverse Madam Butterfly: Japanese student in Germany loves and
abandons German woman, who goes insane)

>

> ####  
>

> #### Week Four: Return to the East (4/15-4/19)

>

> #### Pyle, Chapters 8 and 9

>

> #### READING PACKET

>

> #### 1) OKAKURA Kakuzo, selections from Ideals of the East

>

> #### 2) Imperial Rescript on Education, October 30, 1890

>

> #### 3) Hane, Chapter 3 ("Morals")

>

> #### Movie Suggestion: KUROSAWA Akira, "Sugata Sanshiro" (Actually, this
movie could be considered WWII propaganda, but it is also loosely biographical
and not bad for getting some of the flavor of the Meiji melange)

>

> ####  
>

> #### Week Five: Taisho Democracy and Cosmopolitanism (4/22-4/26)

>

> #### Pyle, Chapter 10

>

> #### READING PACKET:

>

> #### 1) Hane, Chapters 7 ("Textile Factory Workers") and 9 ("Miners")

>

> #### 2) KOBAYASHI Hideo, "Literature of the Lost Home" in Literature of the
Lost Home

>

> #### Movie suggestion: OKUYAMA Kazuyoshi, "The Mystery of Rampo" (Recreation
of the atmosphere of the stories of EDOGAWA Rampo, best-selling Taisho author
of tales of psychological mystery and horror)

>

> ####  
>

> #### Week Six: The Fifteen Year War/World War II (4/29-5/3)

>

> #### MONDAY: In-class midterm

>

> #### Pyle, Chapter 11

>

> #### Dower, Chapters 4, 8, 9 (graphics)

>

> #### READING PACKET:

>

> #### 1) Selections from Haruko Taya Cook & Theodore F. Cook, ed., Japan at
War: An Oral History

>

> #### Movie suggestions: Frank Capra, "Know Your Enemy: Japan" (American
wartime propaganda); KUROSAWA Akira, "Ichiban Utsukushiku" (Japanese language
only; Japanese wartime propaganda); and HARA Kazuo, "The Emperor's Naked Army
Marches On" (Former imperial soldier adopts confrontational tactics to revive
the issue of war guilt in 1980s Japan)

>

> ####  
>

> #### Week Seven: The Occupation (5/6-5/10)

>

> #### Pyle, Chapter 12

>

> #### Dower, Chapters 1 and 5

>

> #### READING PACKET;

>

> #### 1) Beate Sirota Gordon, "The Equal Rights Clause" from The Only Woman
in the Room

>

> #### 2) KOJIMA Nobuo, "American School" in Contemporary Japanese Literature,
Howard Hibbett, ed.

>

> #### Movie suggestion: KUROSAWA Akira "No Regrets for Our Youth" (Product of
new directives given to Japanese film industry under the American Occupation;
story of the awakening of a young woman's consciousness to the evils of the
Japanese militarism at home)

>

> ####  
>

> #### Week Eight: Rise of a Conservative Hegemony (5/13-5/17)

>

> #### Pyle, Chapters 13 and 14

>

> #### Dower, Chapter 6

>

> #### READING PACKET:

>

> #### 1) Mark Schilling, "Consumer Culture" and "Doraemon" in Encyclopedia of
Japanese Pop Culture

>

> #### Movie suggestion: KUROSAWA Akira, "The Bad Sleep Well" (Young man tries
to expose the corruption that lurks within both corporate and government
circles in postwar Japan)

>

> ####  
>

> #### Week Nine: Social Protest (5/20-5/24)

>

> #### Dower, Chapter 7

>

> #### READING PACKET:

>

> #### 1) Frank Upham, "Unplaced Persons and Movements for Place" in Postwar
Japan as History, ed. by Andrew Gordon

>

> #### 2) CHIBANA Shoichi, "The first time Okinawan people have said no" in
Okinawa Dreams OK

>

> #### 2) OTA Masahide, "I'm an amateur politician" in Okinawa Dreams OK

>

> #### 3) AHAGON Shoko, "Go home and be happy" in Okinawa Dreams OK

>

> #### Movie suggestions: KURIHARA Nanako, "Ripples of Change" (Tracking down
some of the central figures in the Japanese women's liberation movement of the
1960s; great documentary footage of protests); also OSHIMA Nagisa, "Cruel
Story of Youth" (Teenagers running amok); and MORITA Yoshimitsu, "Family Game"
(Off-kilter and very funny look at the price paid for middle class success)

>

> ####  
>

> #### Week Ten: Redefining Japan's Place in the World (5/27-5/31)

>

> #### Pyle, Chapters 15-16

>

> #### READING PACKET:

>

> #### 1) Selections from ISHIHARA Shintaro, The Japan That Can Say No

>

> #### 2) Nicholas Kristof, "Real Capitalism Breaks Japan's Old Rules" (NYT
7-15-97)

>

> #### 3) "Mutual Image/Mutual Distortion" (Zinpangu interview with Carol
Gluck)

>

> #### 4) "Who Needs National Identity?" (Zipangu interview with Norma Field)

>

> ####  (OPTIONAL: Dower, Chapter 11)

>

>  
>

> #### [[Back to Top](syllabus.htm)]

