



[homepage](index.html)

[syllabus](syl.html)

[course schedule](csc.html)

[assignments](assign.html)

[deadlines](dead.html)





![kura \(storehouse\) at Shikoku Farmhouse Village Museum
\(2001\)](entry01a.jpg)



|  |    **HIS 371 / 571,  ** **THE HISTORY OF JAPAN**

##

* * *

  
JOURNAL ASSIGNMENT TWO

* * *

    
JOURNAL ASSIGNMENT TWO - A:  
     
In your journal, answer the following series of questions concerning your
reactions to the list of topics to be covered in the course as listed in the
syllabus and course schedule. This assignment (and those that follow) are
designed --

    * to expand the list of possible interests guiding your study of Japanese history and 
    * to elicit questions you might use to provoke your inquiries into specific interest areas.
  


  1. What topics noted in the syllabus or course schedule interest you most? List a minimum of three.
  2. Which of the above topics would you most like to investigate further on your own?
  3. What specifically would you like to find out about your chosen topic?
  4. Formulate at least three specific inquiry questions (formulated as "why" and "how" questions in paragraph form) or thesis statements you might use to guide your exploration. Avoid simply asking "what" and "when" questions, thinking only in terms of assembling "the facts" about the topic you have chosen; instead consider deeper issues that demand assembling data in order to arrive at a substantive ANALYTICAL conclusion about the topic being considered.
  
  
JOURNAL ASSIGNMENT TWO - B:  
    
In your journal, answer the following series of questions concerning your
reactions to the topics listed in the table of contents in the two texts being
utilized in the course, Conrad Totman's **_Japan Before Perry_** and Marius B.
Jansen's **_The Making of Modern Japan_**. As you ponder your responses, you
might want to thumb through the books themselves, reading introductions,
prefaces and epilogues, examining indexes and considering the subtopics
covered in each chapter.  

  1. List a minimum of six topics listed in the table of contents (or subtopics considered within specific chapters) in these two books which interest you at first glance (chose three from each).
  2. Which two of the above topics would you most like to investigate further on your own?
  3. What specifically would you like to find out about your chosen topics?
  4. For each of the two above topics, formulate at least three specific thesis statements or inquiry questions you might use to guide your explorations.

JOURNAL ASSIGNMENT TWO - C:  
    
Examine Karen Brazell's translation of **_The Confessions of Lady Nijo,_**
Donald Keene's translation of **_Four Major Plays of Chikamatsu_** , Natsume
Soseki's **_Kokoro_** and Junichiro Tanizaki's **_The Makioka Sisters_**. Why
read such books in a history course?   What do you think these examples of
literature can tell you about Japanese history? How might each add to your
understanding of the evolution of Japanese civilization and culture?  What
interests you about the possibilities inherent in such an undertaking?  
     
JOURNAL ASSIGNMENT TWO - D:  
    
In your journal, answer the following series of questions concerning your
reactions to the topics discussed in the lecture on American attitudes towards
Japan in historical perspective.

  1. What subject matter discussed in the lecture interested you most?  List a minimum of three ideas or topics.
  2. What notion discussed in the lecture would you most like to find out about in your future investigations of Japanese history?
  3. What linkages emerge in your own mind  as a result of hearing the lecture concerning the relationship between American attitudes towards Japan over time and the rendering of Japanese history found in textbooks and other writings by American authors?
  
How will this insight (these insights) influence your approach to the study of
Japanese civilization and culture?

JOURNAL ASSIGNMENT TWO - D:  
    
In your journal, answer the following series of questions concerning your
reactions to the topics discussed in the lectures on Touchstones for
Understanding Japan in historical perspective.

  1. What subject matter discussed in the two lectures interested you most?  List a minimum of three ideas or topics.
  2. What one notion discussed in the lectures would you most like to find out about in your future investigations of Japanese civilization and culture?
  3. How will the insights derived from these two lectures influence your future approach to the study of Japanese history?

  

|  
---|---|---|---  
  
* * *

This site has been prepared by [Lee A.
Makela](http://www.csuohio.edu/history/fac-stf/lam.html)
([l.makela@csuohio.edu](mailto:l.makela@csuohio.edu)) for the use of students
at [Cleveland State University](http://www.csuohio.edu), Cleveland, Ohio, USA,
who are enrolled in [HIS 371 / 571, History of
Japan](http://www.csuohio.edu/history/Classes/371.html) during the Fall
Semester of the 2001 - 2002 Academic Year; please contact him with any
comments. **    **

* * *

Last revised: August 27, 2001

* * *

