



[homepage](index.html)

[syllabus](syl.html)

[course schedule](csc.html)

[assignments](assign.html)

[deadlines](dead.html)





![kura \(storehouse\) at Shikoku Farmhouse Village Museum
\(2001\)](entry01a.jpg)



|  |    **HIS 371 / 571,  ** **THE HISTORY OF JAPAN**

##

* * *

  
JOURNAL ASSIGNMENTS

* * *



The following series of specific assignments is to be completed in journal
form and submitted for instructor evaluation at those points designated in the
syllabus.  NO LATE ASSIGNMENTS WILL BE ACCEPTED BY THE INSTRUCTOR AFTER THE
LISTED DUE DATE HAS PASSED.  
      
Your completed journal will be reviewed with the following criteria in mind:  

  * the intelligence with which the topics covered are addressed;
  * the thoroughness with which the assignments are completed;
  * the depth of insight expressed in your confrontation with the subjects considered;
  * the thoughtfulness with which the assignments are approached. 

Although effective written communication is essential, the journal WILL NOT be
evaluated with respect to "correct" English and/or punctuation -- the ideas,
in this instance, are the most important ingredient, not the form in which
they are expressed.  
     
The result of this series of assignments is meant to be an informal JOURNAL,
not a classroom exercise nor a series of answers to the specific questions
posed below.  Therefore do not merely "answer the questions" or "follow the
directions" indicated; do not number your responses as if completing a "fill-
in-the-blanks" exercise; do not try to complete the entire series of
assignments at one sitting -- instead tell me (in entries spaced over several
sessions) about what peaks your interest about Japan and Japanese history as
you examine the material assigned for the course and as you listen to the
opening series of lectures.  
      
Then continue through the semester to keep me informed about your mastery of
the material covered in your quest for answers to the questions raised by your
interest.  Your goal throughout the coming semester is to convince the
instructor that you have completed the assigned reading for the course, that
you have mastered the content of the course lectures and that you have taken
the initiative to follow up on your identified personal interests in the
subject matter of the course.  
       
In essence the assignments posed below are meant to focus your attention on a
particular stimulus, a topic for your consideration; in each instance, I am
more interested in how that particular stimulus excites your interest in the
broader subject matter, the history of Japan.  The directions given and the
questions asked, then, are merely meant to stimulate your thoughts about the
topic or information source raised in the assignment.  Your may choose to
ignore these questions or directions entirely (in many cases they are very
repetitious anyway!), as long as you write about what the assignment asks you
to consider.  
     
This overall journal assignment grows out of a conviction that learning is an
active (not a passive) process; that learning is remembering what interests
you; and that learning is both goal oriented and concept centered.  Therefore,
to enable learning to occur, you, the student, must start with what you know,
admit ignorance about what you don't know, identify interests growing out of
that ignorance, then ask questions and seek to establish connections, building
on current knowledge to achieve a new level of understanding.  
     
This series of assignments, then, is designed to give you the opportunity to
describe your interests, to relate what you don't know to what you know
already, to expand your interests, to refine and reinterpret them and
ultimately to restate and formulate them into appropriate inquiry questions to
guide your study of Japanese history.  Approach the writing of your journal
with these criteria in mind and you should find the experience serves both to
enlarge your interest in Japan and to focus your attention on specific topics
and questions you would like to delve into in greater detail over the weeks
ahead.  
  [JOURNAL ASSIGNMENT ONE](jas01.html) (due Wednesday, August 31, 2001)
[JOURNAL ASSIGNMENT TWO](jas02.html) (due Monday, September 10, 2001)
[JOURNAL ASSIGNMENT THREE](jas03.html) (due Wednesday, September 26, 2001 or
Wednesday, October 17, 2001 depending on the piece of literature on which you
have chosen to write your extended essay -- see assignment for details)
[JOURNAL ASSIGNMENT FOUR](jas04.html) (due Wednesday, November 14, 2001)
[JOURNAL ASSIGNMENT FIVE](jas05.html) (due Monday, November 19, 2001 or
Monday, November 26, 2001)   [JOURNAL ASSIGNMENT
SIX](http://www.csuohio.edu/history/courses/his371/jas06.html) (due Friday,
December 14, 2001)  

|  
---|---|---|---  
  
* * *

This site has been prepared by [Lee A.
Makela](http://www.csuohio.edu/history/fac-stf/lam.html)
([l.makela@csuohio.edu](mailto:l.makela@csuohio.edu)) for the use of students
at [Cleveland State University](http://www.csuohio.edu), Cleveland, Ohio, USA,
who are enrolled in [HIS 371 / 571, History of
Japan](http://www.csuohio.edu/history/Classes/371.html) during the Fall
Semester of the 2001 - 2002 Academic Year; please contact him with any
comments. **    **

* * *

Last revised: September 26, 2001

* * *

