**HIST 110-01, 110-07**

**MODERN WESTERN CIVILIZATION**

> **Spring 2000**

**Instructor** : James R. Munson  
**Office** : Wynne 104B  
**Office telephone** : 395-2218  
**Office hours** :  
MWF 2-3  
TR 9:30-10:30  
and by appointment.  
**E-mail** : [jmunson@longwood.lwc.edu](mailto:jmunson@longwood.lwc.edu)

##  **Contents**

Course Description  
Required Texts  
Course Objectives  
Class Schedule  
Course Requirements  
Grading  
Attendance Policy  
Honor Code and Plagiarism  
Bibliography

**_Course Description_** :  A survey of the development of modern Western
Civilization from the age of Absolutism to the present, with emphasis upon the
political, economic, social, cultural and intellectual attributes which have
marked its rise to world-wide influence in the twentieth century.

    Return to Table of Contents

**_Texts_** :

Chambers, Mortimer, Raymond Grew, Barbara Hanawalt, Theodore Rabb, Isser
Woloch, _The Western Experience_ , Volume 2. New York: McGraw-Hill, Seventh
Edition, 1999.

Tierney, Brian, and Joan Scott, eds., _Western Societies: A Documentary
History_ , Volume 2. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, Second Edition, 2000.

   Return to Table of Contents

**_Course Objectives_** :

The goal of this course is for students to develop the following:

1\. An understanding and appreciation of history and historical enquiry.

2\. A sense of what constitutes the civilization of the West and its world-
wide impact.

3\. An ability to think critically, analytically and systematically.

4\. An ability to organize different types of source materials, relate them to
each other by means of critical analysis, and use them in a way that produces
greater insight into the complex subject matter of the course.

5\. A sense of history as combining a variety of disciplines and approaches.

6\. An appreciation for the contribution that an historical perspective can
bring to other disciplines.

7\. A greater ability to express oneself clearly and concisely on paper and
orally.

8\. A greater understanding of the human condition and experience by examining
the dilemmas and challenges faced by men and women of the past.

   Return to Table of Contents

**_Class Schedule_** :

Week 1 (Jan. 17-21)

> _Introduction: Course Information and Requirements_  
> _Europe in 1648 I_

>

> Readings: Chambers, pp. 543-576, 625-633.  
> Tierney and Scott, pp. 3-6, 8-11.

Week 2 (Jan. 24-28)

> _Europe in 1648 II_  
> _The Commercial Revolution and the Rise of Capitalism_  
> _The Scientific Revolution_

>

> Readings: Chambers, pp. 521-539, 579-621.

>

> Map Quiz: Thursday and Friday.

>

> Reminder: Drop deadline is Jan. 31.

Week 3 (Jan. 31-Feb. 4)

> _Royal Absolutism in Theory and Practice: France in the Age of Louis XIV_  
> _The Failure of Absolutism: the English Revolution_  
> _The Enlightenment_

>

> Readings: Chambers, pp. 643-654, 657-684.  
> Tierney and Scott, pp. 11-19.

>

> **First document analysis due by Friday at 5 p.m.**

>

> Quiz on reading for weeks 1-3, Thursday and Friday.

Week 4 (Feb. 7-11)

> _Competition for Empire_  
> _The Coming of the French Revolution_

>

> Readings: Chambers, 689-723.  
> Tierney and Scott, pp. 101-106, 124-130, 169-171.

>

> **Critiques of document analyses due by Wednesday at 5 p.m.**

Week 5 (Feb. 14-18)

> _Review_

>

> **Mid-Term Exam: Thursday, Feb. 17 (sec. 7) or Friday, Feb. 18 (Sec. 1).**

>

> Readings: Chambers, pp. 727-756.  
> Tierney and Scott, pp. 171-177, 189-192.

Week 6 (Feb. 21-25)

> _The French Revolution and the Rise of Napoleon_  
> _The Defeat of Napoleon and the Congress of Vienna_  
> _The Waning of Traditional Europe_

>

> Readings: Chambers, pp. 633-643, 761-791.  
> Tierney and Scott, pp. 136-137, 140-141, 182-187.

Week 7 (Feb. 28-March 3)

> _The Industrial Revolution_  
> _The Rise of Liberalism_  
> _Nationalism and the Breakdown of the Metternich System_

>

> Readings: Chambers, pp. 795-830, 835-844.  
> Tierney and Scott, 144-146, 149-153.

Week 8 (March 6-10)

> _The Revolutions of 1848_  
> _Revolution and Reaction_  
> _The Emergence of the Nation-State: The Unification of Italy_

>

> Readings: Chambers, pp. 844-868, 871-878.  
> Tierney and Scott, pp. 239-245, 246-249, 158-161, 227-228, 303-307.

>

> Quiz on readings for weeks 4-8, Thursday and Friday.

**March 13-17 (Spring Break)**

Week 9 (March 20-24)

> _The Emergence of the Nation-State: the Unification of Germany_  
> _The Second Industrial Revolution_

>

> Readings: Chambers, pp. 878-887, 909-918, 926-939.  
> Tierney and Scott, pp. 318-320, 277-285.

>

> Reminder: The final withdrawal deadline is March 19.

Week 10 (March 27-31)

> _Review_

>

> Readings: Chambers, pp. 887-906, 919-925.  
> Tierney and Scott, pp. 260-262, 346-352.

>

> **Mid-Term Exam: Thursday, March 30 (sec. 7), or Friday, March 31 (Sec.
1).**

Week 11 (April 3-7)

> _Karl Marx and the Rise of Socialism_  
> _Great Britain and France in the late Nineteenth Century_.  
> _Germany and the Habsburg Empire, 1867-1914_

>

> Readings: Chambers, pp. 943-976.  
> Tierney and Scott, pp. 287-294, 338-344.

>

> **Final document analysis due by Friday at 5 p.m.**

Week 12 (April 10-14)

> _The New Imperialism_  
> _World War I_  
> _The Russian Revolution_

>

> Readings: Chambers, pp. 976-980, 983-1020.  
> Tierney and Scott, pp. 321-328.

>

> Map Quiz, Thursday and Friday.

Week 13 (April 17-21)

> _The Treaty of Versailles and Europe Between the Wars_  
> _The Rise of Hitler_  
> _Nazi Germany and the Road to War_

>

> Readings: Chambers, pp. 1020-1033, 1037-1074.  
> Tierney and Scott, pp. 424-431.

Week 14 (April 24-28)

> _World War II and the End of European Dominance_  
> _The Post War World_  
> _Review_

>

> Readings: Chambers, pp. 1075-1080, 1085-1131.  
> Tierney and Scott, pp. 462-467.

>

> Quiz on readings for weeks 9-14, Thursday and Friday.

**FINAL EXAM: See Master schedule**

   Return to Table of Contents

**_Course Requirements_** : Two mid-term exams, a final exam and two document
analyses are the written requirements for this course. Failure to complete any
of the requirements will be regarded as a failure to complete the course, and
will therefore result in a failing grade. In addition, there are five short
map and reading quizzes, with one unannounced bonus quiz in the course of the
semester. Document analyses received in the seven days after the respective
due dates indicated on the weekly schedule will be marked down up to one full
grade. Once the seven days have expired (at 5 p.m. on the seventh day),
absolutely no papers will be accepted, which will result in a failing grade
for the course.

Exams and quizzes must be taken when scheduled. Make-ups will be scheduled
only by prior consent of the instructor, and only for compelling reasons (as
determined by the instructor). If a student, without gaining prior consent, is
unable to take an exam Because of sudden illness or some other extraordinary
event, the instructor must be notified immediately. If I cannot be reached
directly or by phone, leave a message with the History Department. A doctor's
note or other written documentation must accompany a student's request for a
make-up exam.

**Exams** : The first mid-term exam will consist of short answer
identifications. The second mid-term will consist of essays only. The final
exam will consist of short answer identifications, and two essay questions,
one of which will be comprehensive (covering the entire course). As a study
aid, class time will be set aside for review sessions as indicated on your
weekly schedule, but the exams may contain material not covered in these
sessions. The exams will be designed to test acquaintance with the lectures
and the assigned readings. Taking careful notes in class and on the readings,
therefore, is strongly recommended. The instructor will be looking for
evidence of general knowledge, and an organized and analytical approach to
that knowledge. In the essays, the instructor will also be looking for an
ability to combine the raw materials of the course -- text, lectures, and
documentary sources \-- into pertinent and meaningful insights. The instructor
will also be evaluating your ability to communicate those insights. Points
will be taken off for run-on sentences, grammatical errors, spelling errors,
poor punctuation, illegible handwriting or any other problems that, in the
opinion of the instructor, affect comprehension of the student's work. Strive
above all for clarity. The two mid-terms will be fifty minutes long, the final
will be three hours.

**Document analyses:** This will be the subject of a special handout. The
primary source materials from Tierney and Scott will be the point of departure
for these assignments, but you will be required to find longer selections from
primary source collections in the library and on the internet. The first
document analysis will be reviewed by another student in the class before
being reviewed by me. Each student, therefore, will be responsible for a
written critique. This critique will not be graded, but failure to complete it
on time will result in a deduction of seven points from the final grade. All
reports and critiques _must be printed on a word processor_ , in a standard
font of 10 or 12 pitch (courier or Times Roman 10 or 12 is preferred), with
double-spaced text, a title page, and one inch (and no more than one inch)
margins. The text of the final analysis (not including bibliography, title
page and endnotes page) should be no less than 4 **full pages** and no more
than 6 in length. All citations should be in the form of endnotes (in a
separate section at the end of the paper). Your name, the course name and
number, section number and the date must be on the title page. It must include
a bibliography of all sources cited. Bibliography and endnote citations must
conform to the proper style, as defined in the "Department of History and
Political Science Style Sheet" on the departmental web page. More in-depth
coverage of style questions can be found in the latest edition of Kate
Turabian, _A Manual for Writers of Term Papers, Theses and Dissertations_.
**Do not use MLA, APA, parenthetical footnotes or any alternative style
current in other disciplines. Unless you wish to see the instructor fly into a
blind rage, make a particular point of not using parenthetical notes**. All
papers should be saved to disk in at least two separate locations (hard disk
and floppy, two floppies, etc.), so that a new copy may be immediately printed
in case the original hard copy is misplaced.

The type of material that must be documented (i.e. footnoted) includes:
controversial or distinctive arguments and opinions, facts that are not a
matter of broad general knowledge, statistics, all quotes, and paraphrases or
summaries of an author's argument. All direct quotes over fifty words in
length must be indented and single-spaced as described in the departmental
style sheet. You should have at least one footnote or endnote per full page of
text.

It is imperative that you document source material, but your own points,
observations, and arguments _must be expressed in your own words_ : excessive
use of quotes or lengthy paraphrasing of sources will not be accepted, and
leads easily to the grievous sin of plagiarism. On plagiarism, see below. In
addition to the primary sources you find in Tierney and Scott and elsewhere,
you must utilize at least two other secondary sources from the library. These
sources must include a scholarly study of article or book length. You may use
no more than two Internet sources (one as a primary source, one as a secondary
source). You may use encyclopedias and other reference works for background
information on the documents you are using, but these are not to be cited and
will in no way be considered a replacement for a more substantial outside
source. Double-dipping (submitting an assignment for this course that is
substantially the same as a paper submitted for any other course, past or
present) is not permitted.

   Return to Table of Contents

**_Grading_** : The mid-terms, the final, and the research project (the two
document analyses taken together) are worth 90 points each. The five quizzes
are worth eight points each, for a total of 40 points. Your final grade will
be determined by the total number of points you gain out of a maximum of 400.
I do not grade on a curve. Attendance, evidence of progress or lack thereof in
the course of the semester, and class participation, will be used to decide
half grades and borderline cases (which, experience shows, means most
students). Serious attendance problems or misconduct in class can result in a
lowering of grade. The grading scale is as follows:  
    
  _Score_                       _Grade_          388-400 | A+  
---|---  
         372-387 | A  
         360-371 | A-  
         348-359 | B+  
         332-347 | B  
         320-331 | B-  
         308-319 | C+  
         292-307 | C  
         280-291 | C-  
         268-279 | D+  
         252-267  | D  
         240-251 | D-  
         Below 240 | F  
  


**Extra-Credit Assignments** : Extra-credit assignments may be arranged with
the instructor. These assignments must be approved in advance by the
instructor on or before March 3, and will not be accepted unless so approved.
They are worth a maximum of 40 points. Under no circumstances will an extra-
credit assignment be accepted as substitute for any other written requirement
in the course. An extra-credit assignment can only elevate a student into a
higher grade bracket (for example, from a B to an A) if the student has scored
the higher grade on at least one of the three major exams or on the paper. The
assignment must take the form either of an analytical book review (not a book
summary) 3-5 pages in length, or a research paper 5-7 pages in length, and
must utilize sources not assigned in this course. The topic and sources must
be substantially different from the required analyses. Style of text,
footnotes, bibliography and title page must conform to the guidelines of the
departmental style sheet. If you decide to do an extra-credit assignment, it
must be turned in no later than April 14 for you to receive credit.

   Return to Table of Contents

**_Attendance Policy_** : Class attendance is a requirement of this course.
Repeated unexcused absences will lead to a reduction of grade. Unexcused
absences totaling 25% or more will result in an automatic F for the course.
The instructor will excuse a student only under the most extraordinary
circumstances. Chronic lateness will also be penalized, since it presents a
class disturbance. If a student arrives after roll is taken, it is the
student's responsibility to place his or her name on the class roll no later
than the end of that class period. Failure to do so will result in an
unexcused absence.

   Return to Table of Contents

**_Honor Code and Plagiarism_** : Students are expected to observe the honor
code. All work for this course must be pledged. Students found to have cheated
on an exam or to have plagiarized material in a paper will be subject to the
maximum penalty under college rules. For those in doubt about the definition
of plagiarism, it consists of copying passages from a source without both
attribution **and** quotation. If you have reproduced the language of your
source, you have committed plagiarism whether or not you have cited the source
and the page number. This includes passages that a student may have modified:
for example, changed verb tenses, omission or replacement of occasional words,
reshuffling of phrases, sentences or paragraphs, combining of different
plagiarized sources. Writing a bad paper in your own words is far better than
writing a good one using the words of someone else. One suggestion for
avoiding inadvertent echoing of your texts and sources: close all books when
writing, and consult them only for specific facts or direct quotes. Also,
proofread your paper with plagiarism specifically in mind. For more on
plagiarism, see the departmental style sheet.

**_Tape-recording and Class Decorum:_** Tape-recording of lectures is not
permitted. Students who are excused from class by the instructor must make
arrangements with the instructor or with other students to cover the material
missed. Students who skip class without permission are responsible for making
their own arrangements with other students (not with the instructor) for the
material covered in class.

Students are expected to observe class decorum. Students engaging in behavior
bothersome to other students or to the instructor (for example, eating or
drinking, talking in class or the use of personal stereos) will be asked to
leave and marked as absent. By order of the department chair, food and drinks
are not permitted in the classroom.

  Return to Table of Contents

**_Bibliography_** :

References required of all students:

Chambers, Mortimer, Raymond Grew, Barbara Hanawalt, Theodore Rabb, Isser
Woloch, _The Western Experience_ , Volume 2. New York: McGraw-Hill, Seventh
Edition, 1999.

Tierney, Brian, and Joan Scott, eds., _Western Societies: A Documentary
History_ , Volume 2. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, Second Edition, 2000.

Other references:

Consult the bibliographies in the required texts, the library catalog and the
instructor for the outside references to be used in your research paper.

   Return to Table of Contents

[Return to the Department Syllabus Page (Spring
2000)](http://web.lwc.edu/academic/las/history/syllabi.htm#Spring 2000
Syllabi)

[Return to the Department of History and Political Science
Homepage](http://web.lwc.edu/academic/LAS/History/home.htm)

