Early America to 1800
Dr. Mary Ann La Fleur  
T-Th 10-11:15
320 Bibb Graves  
Bibb Graves 24
Tel. x3514  
e-mail:mfleur@trojan.troyst.edu
Office Hours:  
                                                                                                M - 7:30-11:30   
                                                                                                T-Th 11:15-12-15   
                                                                                                         12:30-2:30

I. Texts.  
Jerome R. Reich, _Colonial America_ , Prentice Hall, 1994.

Karen Ordahl Kupperman, ed., _Major Problems in American Colonial History:
Documents and Essays,_ D. C. Heath and Company, 1993.

There are no prerequisites for this course, but the instructor recommends that
students pass the first semester survey course in U. S. history or the first
semester survey course in Western Civilization before enrolling in this
course.

II. Course Description. This course explores British North American and
Caribbean colonial history from the 1580s to 1763; the American Revolution
from the mid-1760s to 1789, including the quarrel between the British
government and some British American colonists from 1765 to 1775, the colonial
war of resistance to and then of independence from Great Britain, 1775-1783,
and the struggle to work out a satisfactory national identity for the United
States, 1776-1789; and the Federalist era, the early national period under the
Constitution of 1787 from 1789 to the national election of 1800-1801. In these
major chronological periods, the course will examine various dimensions of
human experience: political, military, economic, religious, social, and
intellectual. In the period from 1776 to 1801, the course will explore the
search for a _national_ identity domestically, especially with regard to
constitutional government, race, gender, religion, and education, and for a
national identity internationally, especially during the War of the French
Revolution in the 1790s.

III. Course Objectives.

      By the end of the course, students will be

1.  conversant with historical themes concerning the origin and evolution of the United States, including constitutional government, immigration, America, and the world.

2.  familiar with major political -military, economic, religious, social, and intellectual developments in British America and in the United States during 150 years of colonial experience and almost forty years of Revolutionary and national experience.

3\. aware of some of the major historiographical issues involved in this
period of the American past.

4.  able read, comprehend, analyze, compare and contrast, and synthesize both primary and secondary historical sources.

5\. able to demonstrate a satisfactory ability to contribute to class
discussions and to write general and document-based historical essays.

       The above objectives will be measured through written examinations, classroom discussions, and presentations.

* * *

IV. Topics

1.  Introduction to the course.  Review syllabus.   
    The New World in the Fifteenth Century.   
     Reich, Chapter 2, pp. 13-26.

2.  Europe in the Fifteenth Century.   
     Reich,  Chapter 1, pp. 1-12.

3.  Europe in America: Spain, France, Holland and Sweden in the New World.   
     What happened to Portugal?   
      Reich, Chapter 3 + 4, pp. 27-49..   
      Kupperman, "Jacques Cartier Observes the St. Lawrence and Its People, 1535-1536,"   
                          pp. 9-12.   
           and          "Indian, Colonists, and the Environment,"  pp. 27-37 

4.  Background to English Colonization.   
     Reich, Chapter 5, pp. 50-60.   
     Kupperman, Richard Hakluyt's "Discourse of Western Planting," pp. 47-49 

5.  Early Attempt at Settlement and Colonization.   
     Reich, Chapter 6, pp. 62-73.   
     Kupperman, "Captain John Smith on Early Jamestown (1607-1610), pp. 84-89;   
                  and "Richard Frethorne Writes to His Mother and Father, 1623, pp. 93-94. 

6.   The Settlement of New England: The Settlement of the Puritan Colonies.   
       Reich, Chapter 7, pp. 74-85.   
       Kupperman,  "Governor John Winthrop of Massachusetts Bay Gives a Model of Christian Charity,   
       1630," pp. 124-126.

7.   Challengers to the New England Way: Sects and Witches; "Hivings Out,"   
      and the Settlement of the Other Colonies.   
      Reich, Chapter 8, pp. 87-98.   
      Kupperman, "Testimony from the Trial of Anne Hutchinson, 1637," pp. 159-162.   
                         " John Josselny Criticized the Treatment of Dissenters, 1675," p. 166.   
                         " Increase Mather on Proofs of Witchcraft, 1684," pp.167-169.   
                         " Testimony and Examination of Rebecca Nurse of Salem,"  pp. 169-174.

8.  Conflict in the Colonies.   
     Reich, Chapter 9, pp. 100-110.   
     Kupperman,  "Politics and Social Structure in Virgina," by Bernard Bailyn, pp. 211-223. 

9.   The Building of an English Empire.   
      Reich, Chapter 10-12, pp. 111-146. 

10\. Colonial Society.  
      Reich,  Chapter 16, pp. 182-185; Chapter 18, pp. 200-209; Chapter 19; Chapter 23.   
      Kupperman, " William Penn's Afvice on Parting from His Family, 1682," pp. 244-249.   
                         " Thomas Minor's Diary: A Farmer's Year, 1660, "  pp. 239-242. 

11\. Colonial Wars.  Chapter 13.  
     Reich, Chapter 24, pp. 267-274.   
      Kupperman, "Mary Rowlandson Describes Her Captivity Among the Indians," pp. 497-506. 

12\. The American Revolution,  l776-1788.  
      Chapter 25, pp. 277-290; Chapter 26, pp. 294-301. 

13\. The Creation of a New Government.  
      Chapter 27, pp. 306- 319.   


V. Grading System and Weights.

Grading System
Weights  
  A = 90 - 100                                                       Test #1
15%  
  B = 80 -   89                                                       Test #2
15%  
  C = 70 -   79                                                       Final
25%  
  D = 60 -   69
Discussion/  
  F =   0 -    59
Participation 25%  
   Unattempted work will receive a 0.                      Paper/  
    Attempted work will receive a 59.                        Presentation   20% 

VI. Deadlines for Course Work/Test Dates

       Test #1   -    September 30   
       Test #2        October     28          Thanksgiving Vacation -  November 24-28   
       Topic Title    October      7           Last Day of Class - December 7   
       Papers/   
       Presentation  December  3, 7   
       Final             December 14; 8-10 am   
       Discussions   To be announced 

* * *

VII. Explanations of Assignment.

        A. Tests/Final - Focus questions for tests and final  will be distributed.  The final is cumulative.  A discussion of the test format will take place prior to testing.  Each test  will contain both factual questions and essay questions.  Please bring a blue book, a scantron sheet (green), #2 pencil, and a pen on the day of the respective test.  All excused make up tests must be made up within one week of returning to class.  All make up test will consist of only essay questions. 

        B. Paper/Presentation - Each student is expected to write a paper and to give an oral presentation during the last week of class.  _Topics must be approved by instructor._    Topics must be submitted, in writing, on October 7.  In addition to the topic you will need to include a short paragraph briefly describing specifically what you will be doing.  Papers are to be between 8-10 pages typed, double space with normal margins and traditional font size.  Footnotes and bibliography must follow a standard methods (e.g.. Turabian)  Presentations are to be approximately 10-15 minutes in length. 

        C. Discussions -  Readings, movies, presentations and lectures are all subjects for discussion.  All students are encouraged to participate in class.  This means being prepared for class and making contributing comments. 

VIII.  Attendance Policy.  
Excellent class attendance is essential to do well in this course. All
University excuses for absences will be honored. Students must make written
requests for excuses when other absences are unavoidable. At the end of the
course, students who have more than five unexcused absences will suffer a
penalty of fifteen points.

IX. Honor System.  
All students are expected not to cheat.  Evidence of cheating will lead to an
automatic zero on the work involved.

X. American with Disabilities Act.  
Any student whose disabilities fall within ADA must inform the instructor at
the beginning of the term of any special needs or equipment necessary to
accomplish the requirements for this course.

XI. Additional Services.  
Students who have or may be dealing with a disability or learning difficulty
should speak with the instructor, contact the office of Adaptive Needs Program
(Wright 226), or call 6703220/3221. Various accommodations are available
through the Adaptive Needs Program.  
    


