> ##  History 221A - Patterns Of World History,

##  1500-1800



###  Fall Quarter, 1996





**A** graduate introduction to world history, 1500-1750, this course traces
the emergence of the modern world through a study of the broad patterns of
social and economic interaction of Europe with the societies of Asia, Africa
and the Americas. In particular, we will examine European imperial hegemony,
labor systems, global economic exchange, and cultural interactions.

** **

![](images/palace2.gif)**T** he course is formally divided into two parts.
Part One traces the impact of Europe on the Indian Ocean and the ways in which
the Indian Ocean system became incorporated in an emerging capitalist world
centered in northwestern Europe. Part Two traces the development of the
Atlantic system of economic and cultural exchanges between Europe, Africa and
the Americas.

** **

**T** he primary aim of the course is to introduce graduate students to the
chief issues in the current debates over the emergence of the world economy so
that they will be prepared to teach world history at the college level. To
this end, emphasis is placed on mastery of the chief issues through reading,
discussion and writing four short (6 page) papers on the readings.

** **

**R** eading assignments are given as primary ("Read") and secondary ("Also").
Students should do all primary assignments before coming to class each week.
Secondary assignments are at the student's discretion. Students following the
course via website should contact the instructors for additional information.



###  Syllabus

**Week of Sept. 30 Introduction to World History**

> Read: Marshall Hodgson, _Rethinking World History_ , Ch. 1

     Ross Dunn, "Central Themes For World History"      Eric Jones, _The Europe Miracle_ , Preface to 2nd ed.      J.M. Blaut, _Colonizer's Model of the World_ , Ch. 1 

Also: G. Allyrdyce, "Toward World History," _JWH_ I,1 (1990), 23-76

     W. McNeill,  "Rise of the West After 25 Years" _JWH_ I,      E. Burke,  "Marshall Hodgson and the Hemispheric Interregional Approach to World History," _JWH_ (1995), 237-250 

** **

**Week of Oct. 7 The Portugese in the Indian Ocean World**

> Read: M.N. Pearson, _Portugese in India_ , chs. 2-3

     John Wills, "Maritime Asia, 1550-1800" AHR (Feb. 93), 83-105      K.N. Chaudhuri, _Trade & Civ. in the Indian Ocean World_, chs. 2-3 

Also: C. R. Boxer, _The Portugese Seaborne Empire_

     Das Gupta  & Pearson, _India & Indian Ocean_, Chs. 1, 2, 4      A. Hess, "The Ottoman Conquest of Egypt (1517)," _IJMES_ (1973) 55-76      D. S. Richards, _Islam and the Trade of Asia_ , Chaps. 7-10 

** **

**Week of Oct. 14 Political Economy of Merchant Empires**

> Read: M.N. Pearson,  "Merchants and States," in Tracy (ed.) _Pol. Econ. of
Merchant Empires_ , ch. 2.

     G. Parker, _The Military Revolution_ , chs. 3-4      D. O'Flynn & Arturo Giraldez, "Born With A Silver Spoon," JWH (1995) 201-221      J. Richards, "The 17th C. Crisis in S. Asia," _Mod. Asian Studies_ (1990), 625-638 

Also: C. R. Boxer, _The Dutch Seaborne Empire_

     H. Furber, _Rival Empires of Trade_      Steensgaard, _Asian Trade Rev. of the 17th c_., Chs. 1-2 

** **

**Week of Oct. 21 South Asia and the World Economy**

> Read: F. Perlin,  "Proto-industrialization and Pre-Colonial S. Asia," _Past
& Present_, no. 98, (1983) 30-95

     P. Parthasarathi, "Who Was Rich and Who Was Poor in the 18th c.?"      B. Stein, "Class and Pre-Colonial Indian Mercantilism"

Also: C.A. Bayly, _Indian Capital and the Making of the British Empire_ , ch.
2

     Furber, _Rival Empires of Trade_ , Chs. 2-3, 6; 

** **

**Week of Oct. 28 The Spanish Colonial Empire**

> Read: Stevens-Arroyo,  "The Inter-Atlantic Paradigm," CSSH (1993), 515-543.

     J. Burkholder, _Colonial Spanish America_ chs. 1-4      David Sweet,  "The Ibero-American Frontier Mission"

Also: L. Bethell, _Spanish Colonial America_ , Chs. 1-3,

     L. Bethell, _Colonial Brazil_ , Chs. 2-4,      C. Gibson, _Spain in America_

** **

**Week of Nov. 4 The Colonial American Economy**

> Read: Leslie Bethell, _Colonial Spanish America_ , ch. 5

     Burkholder, _Col. Sp. Am_. chs. 5-6      Eric Van Young,  "Mexican Rural History Since Chevalier"

Also: J. Lockhart, _Spanish Peru, 1532-1560: A Colonial Society_

     S. Schwartz and J. Lockhart, _Early Latin America_

** **

**Week of Nov. 11 Amerndians and the Forest System**

> Read: David Sweet,  " Amazon Encounter" (Work in progress)

     E. E. Rich, "Russia& the Colonial Fur Trade," _Econ. Hist. Rev_. 7 (1955), 307-328.      Eric Wolf, _E &PWH_, Ch. 6      Richard White, _The Middle Ground_ , Ch. 3 

Also: Robert Delort, _Le commerce des fourrures en Occident_

     C. Martin, _Keepers of the Game_      A. Metraux,  "The Revolution of the Ax," _Diogenes_      H. Grant,  "One Step Foreward..." _Canadian Hist. Rev_. (1981), 304-22 

** **

**Week of Nov. 18 Africans and African-Americans in the Atlantic World (I)**

> Read: John Thornton, _Africans and African-Americans_ , Part 1

     B. Solow, (ed.) _Slavery & Rise of Atlantic System_, Ch. 2      Richard Dunn, _Sugar & Slaves_ chs. 2-3, 6-7, 10 

Also: Inikori & Engerman (eds.) _Atlantic Slave Trade_ , Ch. 6-7

     Solow and Engerman, _British Capitalism and Colonial Slavery_

** **

**Week of Nov. 25 Africans and African-Americans in the Atlantic World (II)**

> Read: John Thornton, _Africans and African-Americans_ , Part 2

     Carolyn Fick, _The Making of Haiti_ , chs. 2-4, conclusion      Thornton, "I am the Subject of the King of Kongo," _JWH_ (1993) 181-214 

Also: J. G. Clark, _La Rochelle and the Atlantic Economy_

     Anne Perotin-Dumont, _Etre patriot sous les tropiques: Guadeloupe_

** **

**Week of Dec. 2 The Wallerstein/Stern Debate**

> Read: Immanuel Wallerstein, _Modern World System_ Vol. 1, Chs. 2-4

     Steve Stern,  "Feudalism, Capitalism and the World-System in the Perspective of Latin America and the Cariibbean," _AHR_ 93 (Oct. 1988), 829-872      Wallerstein,  "Comments on Stern's Critical Tests," _AHR_ 93 (Oct. 1988), 873-885;      Stern,  "Reply" _AHR_ 93 (Oct. 1988), 886-897 

Also: Reviews of Wallerstein: Brenner in _NLR_ (1977), 25-92;

     Skocpol in _AJS_ (1977), 1075-90; Ragin  & Chirot in Skocpol, (ed.) _Vision & Method in Historical Sociology_



**[Home](index.html) | [Class Info](classinfo.html) |
[Bibliographies](bibliographies.html) | [Links**](links.html)



