### History 543.01  
Ancient India



_INTRODUCTION_ : This course offers an introduction to the history and culture
of ancient and medieval India, that is, to the period of South Asian history
prior to the Muslim invasions of the subcontinent in the 10th and 11th
centuries c.e. The course will not, however, concentrate on political history,
but will focus primarily on the study of religious traditions and social
institutions which are of central and continuing importance for the later
history of South Asia. Indeed, the final week of the course shall be devoted
to a discussion of the religious beliefs and political techniques of Mahatma
Gandhi, as a means of illustrating the vitality of Indian religious traditions
in modern times.

_

REQUIREMENTS_: Students will be required to complete a map question, three
short papers and a comprehensive final examination. The topics for the papers
are given below. There will also be at least two brief quizzes on terms and
concepts discussed in the weekly readings. The dates of these quizzes will be
announced in class. Each paper will account for twenty percent of the grade,
while the map exercise and quizzes will together make up ten percent of the
total grade. The final examination will count for twenty-five percent of the
grade with the remaining five percent based upon class participation.

Books for the course may normally be purchased at the Student Book Exchange on
High Street. Students who wish to use different editions of texts should be
certain to check with the instructor first.

The class will normally meet twice a week, Monday and Wednesday, for just
under two hours. Students are expected to attend regularly or present evidence
of cobra bites, tiger attacks, malaria or other tropical afflictions.



_

LECTURES AND READINGS

WEEK 1:

_

a. Monday: Introduction and Indian geography.

b. Wednesday: Indus civilization and pre-Aryan population.

_Readings:_ Stanley Wolpert, _A New History of India_ (most recent edition
preferred but not necessary), pp. 3-14.

n.b. For the map question, distributed in class, please visit the map room on
the second floor of the main library.

_

WEEK 2_ :

a. Monday: Aryans or Indo-Europeans and Aryan Language and Religion.

b. Wednesday: _The Upanishads_ ; Lecture and Discussion.

_Readings:_ Wolpert, _A New History of India_ , 24-37; Juan Mascaro, The
Upanishads (entire volume) or other editions such as Alistair Shearer and
Peter Russell, _the Upanishads_.

_

WEEK 3:

_

a. Monday: Buddhism: Hinayana and Mahayana

b. Wednesday: The Mauryan Empire and Ashoka.

_Readings:_ Wolpert, _A New History of India_ , 37-54; _The Dhammapada_
(entire).

_

WEEK 4:

_

a. Monday:The Laws of Manu and the idea of caste.

b. Wednesday: Discussion: A. Mayer, _Caste and Kinship in Central India_ ,
Chapters 1-3.

_Readings:_ Laws of Manu (handouts); Adrian Mayer, _Caste and Kinship in
Central India_ , 1-3

_

WEEK 5:

_

a. Monday: Discussion: Mayer, chapters 4 and 5.

b. Wednesday: Caste: South Indian variant: Kerala

_Readings:_ Mayer, _Caste and Kinship in Central India_ , 4-7.

_

WEEK 6:

_

a.Monday: Movie: North Indian Village and village religion.

b. Wednesday: the Invasions: Greek, Sythian and Kushan.

_Readings:_ Wolpert, _A New History of India_ , 55-87; R. Redfield and Milton
Singer, "Village India," xerox on reserve; W.W. Tarn, _The Greeks in Bactria
and India_ , 351-408.

_

WEEK 7:

_

a. Monday: Cartography: Greek/Islam and "Hindu".

b. Wednesday: Puranic Hinduism and Bhakti.

_Readings:_ Franklin Edgerton bans and ea., _The Bhagavad Gita_ (entire)

_

WEEK 8:

_

a. Monday: Bhakti in Bengal and Virishaivism in South India

b. Wednesday: Video: _Ramayana_ and _Gita Govinda_

_Readings:_ Virishaiva poems (distributed in class).

_

WEEK 9:

_

a. Monday: The Gupta empire and successor states.

b. Wednesday: Rajputs and the Turkish/Muslim invasions.

_Readings:_ Wolpert, _A New History of India_ , 88-126; Kalidasa, Shakuntala
(entire).

_

WEEK 10:

_

a. Monday: Discussion: _Shakuntala_ and Introduction to Gandhi.

b. Wednesday: Religion and the Politics of Non-Violence - the legacy to Martin
Luther King.

_Readings:_ M.K. Gandhi, _Autobiography_ (entire).

* * *

* * *

_

ESSAY TOPICS

_

  1. The authors of _The Upanishads_ and the Buddha were both concerned with the problem that became the central issue in Indian religious life from the late Vedic period down to modern times. In your paper first explain the nature of that problem as defined by these men. Then explain how these two approaches are similar to or differ from each other. 3-5 pp. typewritten(750-1250 words). due Monday of week 4. 
  2. Ramkheri is an example of a highly stratified society. In this essay first describe how Ramkheri villagers rank castes in terms of their _ritual_ status. Then evaluate the degree to which this status accurately reflects the economic power of the major castes in the village. 3-5pp. typewritten. Due Monday of week 6. 
  3. Underlying the visual and poetic imagery of the Krishna legend is an important religious argument. Explain the religious symbolism of the poetry and painting devoted to this legend. Then analyze the extent to which the doctrine of Krishna worship differs from and is similar to Vedism and Buddhism (both Hinayana and Mahayana). 

