AUGUSTANA COLLEGE  
**THE HISTORY OF WESTERN CIVILIZATION - I**

     History 110-A                                                            Christopher Oldstone-Moore   
     Spring 2000                                                                Office: Madsen 38   
     Madsen 201                                                                Office Hours: T/Th 9-10; 2:30-3:30   
                                                                                       Phone: 5325   
                                                                                       e-mail: coldston@inst.augie.edu 

     **Overview**

     This class is designed to offer a framework for learning about our civilization. The class focuses on   
     how our social, religious, intellectual and political traditions originated in the lost civilizations of   
     Israel, Greece and Rome, and how those traditions have been reevaluated and reshaped in the   
     construction of the European culture.  There is a special emphasis in this course on culture:  art,   
     music and literature, and also on "heroes"--that is to say, celebrated representatives of great ideals. 

     The fundamental goals of this class are: 

     1) To become familiar with the great events and persons of Western past. 

     2) To develop a capacity for analyzing historical evidence and expressing insights   
          verbally and in writing. 

     3) To recognize more clearly the historical influences that have shaped our own civilization.   
    
     **Course Materials On-line--http://www.augie.edu/dept/history/Civ1.htm**

     This syllabus, the study guides, readings and lectures are available on-line at the address above.   
     The text of the lectures does not include the discussion of items of literature, art, or music for that   
     day.  These will presented in discussion.  You may wish to read the lectures in advance to improve   
     comprehension and develop questions.  You may also wish to read them again later for review. 

     **Books to Purchase at Augustana Bookstore**

     Jackson Spielvogel, Western Civilization   
     Plato, Trial and Death of Socrates   
     Davis, The Return of Martin Guerre 

     **Requirements**

     This class is designed to have a workload of averaging 2-3 hours of homework for each session (9   
     hours/week) 

     _Daily Written Question_ s   
          Every day is a discussion day.  All students should be prepared to discuss in class the   
          readings assigned for that day.  Every third session, according the group schedule, students   
          will turn in two written questions.  For one of those questions, there should be a paragraph   
          outlining an answer or possible answers.  The professor will call upon students to comment   
          present and explain their questions in class.  On discussion days there will be a question   
          sheet including a space for each student to formulate their own question.   
    
    
    
    


     _Papers_   
          Document Study (2 pages)  An analysis of one document   
    
          Theme (2 pages) A critical discussion of two documents on a single theme   
    
          Film Review (2 pages) A review of the film, The Return of Martin Guerre   
    
          Essay (4 pages) A paper that presents a thesis and defends it with analysis of at least three   
          sources   
    
     Due Dates:  Written assignments will receive a half-grade deduction for every day that   
                        it is late. Extensions will be granted only in advance and in pressing   
                        circumstances. 

     _Quizes_   
             4 quizes involving short answer and identifications of map locations, people, art, and   
             music.  The top three scores will count for the final grade.   
    
     _Exams_   
             There are study guides for the midterm and final.   
    
     _Special Needs_

     If any student has a demonstrable need for special consideration with respect to the requirements   
     of this class they should inform the professor immediately. 

     _Grading_

     The course is 500 points:   
    
     Questions                40 points   
     3 Quizes                  20 pts each   
     Document Study     20 pts   
     Theme                     40 pts   
     Film Review           40 pts   
     Essay                      100 pts   
     Exam 1                   100 pts   
     Exam 2                   100 pts   
    
     The final grade is calculated on this scale: 

      95-100% (475-500pts)= A   
      90-94% (450-474)       = A-   
      86-89% (430-449)       = B+   
      82-85% (410-429)       = B   
      78-81% (390-409)       = B-   
      74-77% (370-389)       = C+   
      70-73% (325-369)       = C   
      66-69% (330-324)       = C-   
      62-65% (310-329)       = D+   
      54-61% (270-274)       = D   
      Below 54 %                 = F 

     This scale will be adjusted according to the highest score, by a factor of 50% of the difference.   
     For example, if the highest score is 490 points, the scale will be adjusted downwards 5 points, so   
     that 470 becomes the new cutoff for an A. 

    
     **  About the Readings :**

     The textbook is an example of a secondary source.  That is to say, a book about the past, written   
     after the fact--sometimes long after.  It  offers a narrative and analytical account of the peoples   
     and events of the past.   You will note that it contains excerpts from primary sources in attempt to   
     bring the reader closer to the historical documents. 

     The other readings in this course are primary sources.  That is to say readings or artifacts  from the   
     past being examined.  They are samples of the evidence historians study in order to know the past.   
     Reading primary sources is more difficult than reading secondary sources, but more rewarding.   
     We can examine the evidence of the past for ourselves, and not simply rely on what others tell us. 

     Scholars must be critical readers.  If either primary or secondary texts are to provide any answers,   
     the reader must ask questions.  The reader must interrogate the readings, much as a scientist   
     develops hypotheses before experiments, or a detective considers possible scenarios before   
     questioning witnesses.  To help in this process of interrogation of the primary sources,  two   
     questions are posed for each primary reading.  Each time you read, devise a question of your own.   
     The best questions are both specific and significant, concerning the persuasiveness or intentions of   
     the author's view, or what historians might learn from reading the text. 

     When reading the textbook, bear the following considerations in mind.  What ideas or events are   
     emphasized, and why?  What is the time frame of the chapter and sections?  Do they make   
     sense?   Why does the author organize the section of the chapter in the way he does? What   
     especially does the author want you to know, and what points is he trying to make?    How do the   
     excerpts from primary sources or photographs further the points the author is making? 

     **Discussion Class Schedule**   
    
     On discussion days (in bold), each group will meet separately for an hour according to this   
     schedule: 

     Group A:  9-10 am           Group B: 11am-12noon         Group C: 12noon-1pm   


     **SCHEDULE OF CLASSES**

     Tuesday, Feb 8      Introduction   
                                       Investigators of humanity 

     HEBREWS 

     Thursday, Feb 10  The Mesopotamian Legacy   
                                      Spielvogel, Chap. 1 through p. 16   
                                      The Code of Hammurabi [Website]   
                                      Exodus 20-22   
    
     Tuesday, Feb 15   The Emergence of the Hebrews   
                                      Spielvogel, Chap. 2 through p. 40   
                                      I Samuel 4-8   
                                      I Kings 9-11 

     Thursday, Feb 16  Religious Heroes: David and the Prophets   
                                      II Samuel  5-12   
                                      Hosea 4-6   
                                      Isaiah 1-3, 40   
    


     GREEKS 

     *Tuesday, Feb 22  The Greek Polis (Grp A)  *quiz   
                                      Spielvogel,  chap. 3 (61- 67; 78-88)   
                                      Aristotle, Politics [Website]   
    
     *Thursday, Feb 24 Rise and Fall of Athenian Greatness (Grp B) *doc study due   
                                      Spielvogel, chap. 3 (pp. 67-77)   
                                      Thucydides, History [Website]   
    
     Tuesday, Feb 29 Socrates, the Philosophic Hero   
                                       Plato: Apology, Crito   
    
     Thursday, Mar 2   Hellenizing the World (Grp C)   
                                        Spielvogel,  chap. 4 

     ROMANS   
    
     *Tuesday, Mar 7   Roman Republic (Grp A)  *quiz   
                                      Spielvogel,  chap. 5   
                                      Plutarch, Cato [Website] 

     Thursday, Mar 9 Caesar, the Statesman Hero   
                                     Seutonius, Lives of the Caesars  [website] 

     Tuesday, Mar 14   The Roman Empire (Grp B)   
                                     Spielvogel,  chap. 6 

     Thursday, Mar 16 MIDTERM EXAM   
              ______________   
              SPRING BREAK 

     Tuesday, Mar 28  Heroes of Christianity (Grp C)   
                                      Spielvogel,  chap. 6 pp. 170 to the end   
                                      St. Paul: Galatians 1-2  and  Romans 9, 11-13   
                                      Martyrdom of St. Perpetua [Website]   
                                      St. Augustine, Confessions [Website] 

     *Thursday, Mar 30   Byzantines and Barbarians (Grp A) *Theme due   
                                      Spielvogel, chap 7   
                                                         chap. 8 (to p. 227)   
                                      St. Benedict, Rule [Website]   


     MEDIEVAL EUROPE 

     *Tuesday, Apr 4    The Spirit of the High Middle Ages (Grp B) *quiz   
                                      Spielvogel, chap 9 (to p. 256)   
                                                         chap 10 (pp 280-81)   
    
     Thursday, Apr 6    Knights: Heroes of the Sword (Grp C)   
                                       Speilvogel, chap 9 (from p. 257)   
                                       Jean, Sire of Joinville, Memoirs [Website]   
                                       Raymond Lull, Order of Chivalry [Website] 

     Tuesday, Apr 11  Lancelot: Hero of Love   
                                       Chretien de Troyes, Lancelot [Website]   
    
     Thursday, Apr 13  The World of the High Middle Ages (Grp A)   
                                       Spielvogel, chap. 10 

     Tuesday, Apr 18   The Crisis of the Late Middle Ages (Grp B)   
                                        Spielvogel, chap. 11 

     Thursday, Apr 20  A Late Medieval Peasant Adventure   
                                        Davis, The Return of Martin Guerre   
    
    
     RENAISSANCE AND REFORMATION   
    
     *Monday, Apr 24    Showing of film The Return of Martin Guerre 9:00 pm in classroom 

     * Tuesday, Apr 25     The Renaissance (Grp C)    *quiz   
                                         Spielvogel, chap. 12 to p. 345 

     (Tuesday, Apr 25)  Showing of film The Return of Martin Guerre 9:00 pm in classroom   


     Thursday, Apr 27  Artist Heroes   
                                        Spielvogel, chap. 12: p. 345 to the end   
                                        Vasari, Michelangelo [Website]   
                                        Art slides on Website (Da Vinci, Michelangelo, Raphael) 

     Friday, Apr. 28       Film review due 

     Tuesday, May 2      Exploration and Exploitation (Grp A)   
                                        Spielvogel, chap. 14 to p. 401   
                                        Columbus, Letters [Website] 

     *Thursday, May 4  The Reformation  (Grp B)   *quiz   
                                        Spielvogel, chap. 13 to p. 328   
                                        Luther, Letter to the Christian Nobility [Website] 

     Friday, May 5        Essay due 

     Tuesday, May 9 Protestantism and the Catholic Reformation   
                                        Spielvogel, chap. 13 to the end.   
                                        Calvin, Institutes [Website]   
                                        Council of Trent [Website] 

     Thursday, May 11  Religion and Power (Grp C)   
                                        Spielvogel, chap 14 (p. 401 to the end) 

     FINAL EXAM Monday, May 15, at 1:00 pm   


