[**mainpage**](../../home.html) | ![Early Childhood Education at Columbia
College Chicago](38-title.gif)  
---|---  
[**index**](../index.html)  
[**early child**](index.html) **[mainpage](../index.html)** |
[Curriculum](courses.htm) || [Course Details](a.current.htm) ||
[Profiles](profiles.htm) || [Gallery](gallery.htm) || [Related
Sites](sites.htm)  
---|---  
  


  |

**Course Descriptions**

* * *

38-1100 **Teaching in Early Childhood Education** , 3 credits

Course provides overview of early childhood education with opportunity for
students to gain exposure to current issues; career possibilities; and the
responsibilities, challenges, and rewards encountered by those who work with
young children. Particular attention given to requirements of living and
working with colleagues, children, and families from different cultural
backgrounds; and means by which member's art form allows the individual to
both gain understanding and communicate with others. Students write on a
weekly basis; observations required. Permission of Program Director required.

_[view recent syllabus](courses.listing.38-3110.htm)_

38-1530 **Brain Basics: Health and Development of Young Children** , 3 credits

_[view recent syllabus](courses.listing.38-1530)_

38-2105 **Methods of Observing and Writing for Early Childhood Educators** ,
variable credit

Course provides an opportunity for program students to develop observation,
reading, and writing skills when they have been unable to do so in other
courses. Students make focused field observations, explore the writings of
accomplished teachers, and write and refine various forms of communication
specific to the classroom. These include assessment records, reports to
various audiences, reflective journals and essays, an educational philosophy
statement, and a research paper with a literature review.

_[view recent syllabus](courses.listing.38-2105.htm)_

38-2110 **The History and Philosophy of Early Childhood Education** , 3
credits

Students explore history of early childhood and elementary education to
understand influences by social, political, and economic forces shaping lives
of children and families. Course profiles significant theories and people who
have shaped early childhood education from Socrates to present. Students
consider who determines goals of education; who defines and articulates
problems of education; and how that determines what solutions are created.
Permission of Program Director required.

_[view recent syllabus](courses.listing.38-2110.htm)_

38-2125 **Child Growth and Development** , 3 credits

Course provides framework for studying process of human development, and
explores physical, cognitive, social, and emotional development of children,
birth through age eight. Students learn milestones in each area of development
in first eight years of life. They learn to recognize normal development in
young children. Students integrate their understanding of development in
various domains into working knowledge of young children. Permission of
Program Director required.

_[view recent syllabus](courses.listing.38-2125.htm)_

38-2130 **Language Development** , 3 credits

Students explore stages of language learning in first eight years of life and
principles governing the process. They learn how various contexts both in and
outside a child's home interact with factors such as age, sex, and cultural
experiences of participants in conversation; and how these factors affect
language competence and performance. Students examine role of adults, peers,
and siblings in fostering language development, and learn how group
experiences in child a care program can be arranged to maximize language
development. Permission of Program Director required.

_[view recent syllabus](courses.listing.38-2130.htm)_

38-2140 **Child, Family, and Community** , 3 credits

Course presents study of human development and behavior throughout life cycle.
Emphasis placed on interdependence of family, culture, and community on
development and education of children from newborn through eight years of age.
Students consider their future role of teacher and implications of context-
theirs and their students' on the teaching-learning process. Permission of
Program Director required.

_[view recent syllabus](courses.listing.38-2140.htm)_

38-2155 **The Exceptional Child** , 3 credits

Course provides introduction to concept of exceptionality and overview of
various forms of typical growth and development. Course work includes
psychology and identification of exceptional children with focus on children
classified as having learning disabilities and their implications for
classroom life in both special classes and inclusion settings. Permission of
Program Director required.

_[view recent syllabus](courses.listing.38-2155.htm)_

38-2175 **Topics in Early Childhood Education** , variable credit

_[view recent syllabus](courses.listing.38-2175)_

38-3100 **Construction of Ideas in Childhood** , 3 credits

Students examine network of "big ideas" in disciplines of science, math,
humanities, and social science. Course provides framework for understanding
concepts, habits of mind, and skills characteristic of professionals in each
discipline. Course prepares teachers to recognize important concepts and to
effectively facilitate children's emerging understandings and skills in
various domains of thinking, as these understandings emerge in daily classroom
life. Permission of Program Director required.

_[view recent syllabus](courses.listing.38-3100.htm)_

38-3110 **PrePrimary Practicum with Methods I** , 3 credits

In this seminar with practicum, students develop curriculum along with
assessment strategies for working with infants, toddlers, preschool, and
kindergarten children. Work is based on developmental needs, conceptual
understandings, and skills appropriate for children at different ages in areas
of math, science, social studies, the arts, and literacy. Through a seven hour
weekly practicum experience in a preschool classroom, students examine
children's construction of knowledge. Focus is on role of teacher and
classroom environment and its activities in promoting development. Permission
of Program Director required.

_[view recent syllabus](courses.listing.38-3110.htm)_

38-3120 **Schools and Society** , 3 credits

Course familiarizes students with schools as work places where a teacher's
career unfolds. Students examine structure of teaching within political,
economic, and social context of educational institution. Particular attention
given to role of teacher in relation to issues of governance, organizational
structure, funding, union relationships, community involvement, collegial
relationships, and professional growth. Students are asked to attend meetings
of local school council, school board, faculty, and grade level. Permission of
Program Director required.

_[view recent syllabus](courses.listing.38-3120.htm)_

38-3130 **PrePrimary Student Teaching with Methods II** , 3 credits

This is a continuation of Methods I and meets the requirements of a preprimary
student teaching experience. Students spend seven hours per week in preschool
classroom carrying out a range of classroom responsibilities. Two five day
weeks are also scheduled with the support of the director of Undergraduate
Education. Class meetings continue to support students in their efforts to
relate theory and practice, as well as in developing effective methods for
working with young children and their families. Permission of Program Director
required.

_[view recent syllabus](courses.listing.38-3130.htm)_

38-3140 **Teaching Reading to Young Children** , 2 credits

Course prepares students to design and implement writing and reading curricula
for children four to eight years of age in preschool through third grade
classrooms. Course presents profiles of children in the process of learning to
read and write, and examines role of teachers in learning process. Students
examine patterns of teacher-child-group interaction that foster literacy
development through a variety of curricular approaches and develop plans for
preschool through third grade classrooms. Permission of Program Director
required.

_[view recent syllabus](courses.listing.38-3140.htm)_

38-3150 **Primary Methods** , 4 credits

Students design and implement appropriate curriculum goals for teaching
kindergarten through grade three in areas of language arts, social studies,
math, and science. Students study scope and sequence of skills, as well as
information embedded in these subject areas. They research and practice
implementing activities across disciplines to assist children's learning.
Students explore range of assessment techniques and develop strategies for
planning curricula that incorporates their understanding of both child
development and academic disciplines. Permission of Program Director required.

_[view recent syllabus](courses.listing.38-3150.htm)_

38-3160 **Primary Practicum with Methods III** , 4 credits

In this seminar with practicum, students develop curriculum along with
assessment strategies for working with primary grade children. Work is based
on the developmental needs, conceptual understandings, and skills appropriate
for children at different ages in the areas of math, science, social studies,
the arts, and literacy. Through their seven hours per week practicum in a
primary classroom, students examine children's construction of knowledge.
Focus is placed on the role of the teacher in the classroom in promoting
development. Permission of Program Director required.

_[view recent syllabus](courses.listing.38-3160.htm)_

38-3170 **Primary Student Teaching with Methods IV** , 8 credits

Course is a continuation of Methods III and meets the requirements of a
primary student teaching experience. Students spend two full days a week in a
primary classroom carrying out a range of responsibilities. Five weeks of
full-time responsibilities are also scheduled with the support of the Director
of Undergraduate Education. The class meeting continues to support students in
relating theory and practice, as well as developing effective methods for
working with young children and their families. Permission of Program Director
required.

_[view recent syllabus](courses.listing.38-3170.htm)_

38-3175 **Independent Project: Early Childhood Education** , variable credit

_[view recent syllabus](courses.listing.38-3175)_

38-3180 **The Role of Art in Development** , 4 credits

Students reflect on their four year experience in this culminating seminar.
Each student asked to synthesize various components of their experience in
General Education; the Visual Arts, Performing Arts, or Language and Culture;
and the Professional Education Sequence into a coherent whole. Students
consider role of the arts in development of children, and in their own
development as preservice teachers. Students develop individual products to
represent their understandings. Permission of Program Director required.

_[view recent syllabus](courses.listing.38-3180.htm)_

[Columbia College Course Listings](http://con-
ed.colum.edu/Action.lasso?-Database=courses.fp3&-Layout=list&-response=/coursecatalog/hitlist.html&-op=eq&DepartmentNumber=38&-MaxRecords=20&-SortField=number&-SortOrder=ascending&-Search)

[back](courses.htm) || top  
---|---  
| [Disclaimer](../../disclaimer.html) | **![](logo.gif)**

  | (C) 1998 Columbia College Chicago  
600 South Michigan Avenue  
Chicago, IL 60605-1996  
Telephone: 312-663-1600  
---|---|---|---

