### THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK: Britain in the World, 1700-Present

  
Honors Preceptorial 58H  
Fall 1996  
Loma 321  
Tuesday 3:00-5:45 p.m.  

Dr. James Gump  
Loma 329  
Ph.: 260-6811  
Fax: 260-2272  
E-Mail: gump@sandiego.edu  
Office Hours:  
M 1:30-3:00 p.m.  
W 1:30-3:00 p.m.  
Th 1:30-3:30 p.m.  

Overview and Objectives:  

This course seeks to understand not only how and why Great Britain accumulated
an empire encompassing one quarter of the earth, but in addition how the
peoples of that empire responded to the British presence. The class will focus
on Britain's settlement colonies in Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and South
Africa; its "dependencies" and "protectorates" in Africa and the Middle East;
and Britain's "crown jewel" India. We will contrast informal and formal
imperialism, examine why some indigenous societies collaborated and others
resisted, explore the political, economic, and psychological impact of
imperial overrule, study the conditions leading to decolonization after World
War II, and consider the popular imagery of empire as depicted in fiction and
film. Consideration will also be given to comparing Britain's expansion
overseas with America's conquest of the western frontier. In addition to the
readings prescribed below, we will view and discuss such films as "Zulu,"
"Breaker Morant," and "A Passage to India."  

  
Grades and Attendance:  

Students will be asked to complete the assigned readings according to the
timetable prescribed herein, draft midterm and final essay examinations, write
short (1 page) critiques (handwritten or typed) of the assigned readings and
films, and prepare an in-class seminar presentation. Students should select a
seminar topic in consultation with the instructor. In addition to the
presentation, students will be responsible for submitting a 5-7 page seminar
paper with endnotes and bibliography. These papers should be typed and conform
to a standard style manual (e.g., Kate Turabian's A Manual for Writer's, 5th
edition).  

Possible seminar topics include the following:  

1\. Develop a seminar on one of the following topics: Anglo-Irish relations,
l800-present; the formation of Sierra Leone; the Opium Wars; the modern
history of Malaysia; the modern history of Jamaica; the modern history of
Fiji; the modern history of Zimbabwe; the Mau Mau rebellion in Kenya; or the
liberation struggle in South Africa.  

2\. Develop a seminar discussing the major novels or essays of Salman Rushdie
(India), Paul Scott (India), Nadine Gordimer (South Africa), Andre Brink
(South Africa), Patrick White (Australia), or Margaret Atwood (Canada).  

3\. Develop a seminar comparing and contrasting the history of race relations
in South Africa and North America, based on such studies as Howard Lamar and
Leonard Thompson's The Frontier in History, George Fredrickson's White
Supremacy or Black Liberation, or John Cell's The Highest Stage of White
Supremacy.  

4\. Read J.A. Hobson's Imperialism: A Study or Lenin's Imperialism: The
Highest Stage of Capitalism, and discuss its relevance to the British imperial
experience.  

5\. Develop a seminar evaluating the role of the missionary in British
imperial history, focusing on one of Britain's colonies.  

6\. Develop a seminar on the role of women in British imperial history,
focusing on one of Britain's colonies.  

7\. Read Tony Smith's The Pattern of Imperialism and develop a seminar on the
similarlities and differences between American and British imperialism.  

8\. Read Ariel Dorfman's The Empire's Old Clothes or How to Read Donald Duck
and develop a seminar on the impact of western values on the Third World.  

9\. Read Daniel Headrick's The Tools of Empire or The Tentacles of Progress
and develop a seminar on the relationship between technology and empire.  

10\. Read T.E. Lawrence's Seven Pillars of Wisdom or Edward Said's Orientalism
and develop a seminar on European attitudes toward the "Orient."  

11\. Read Philip Ziegler's Mountbatten and develop a seminar on the "official
mind" of imperialism.  
  
12\. Read Nelson Mandela's Long Walk to Freedom and develop a seminar on the
liberation struggle in South Africa.  

Your evaluative outcome in this class can be very predictable if you abide by
the following guidelines: 1) participation; 2) the careful and timely
preparation of reading and writing assignments; and 3) regular attendance.
First, I regard myself as a facilitator of learning, not an educational tsar,
and rely on student contributions to enlighten and enliven the course of
study. Second, our class can only be enlightened and enlivened if you prepare
your reading and writing assignments in a careful and timely fashion. Third,
if you do not come to class--or if you consistently arrive late--points one
and two are irrelevant. Therefore, students will be allowed only two excused
absences. After two excused absences, students will have their final course
grade lowered by one letter for each absence thereafter.  

Further, if you have not done so already please familiarize yourself with
USD's Academic Integrity policy, especially the information on plagiarism,
fabrication, and examination behavior. Please remember that intentional
cheating will result in an automatic failure for this course, as well as
activate a Hearing Committee of administrators, faculty, and student peers.
This Committee is empowered to impose a variety of sanctions, including
probation, suspension, and even expulsion from the University.  

Finally, no extra-credit work is required and none will be accepted.
Examinations will be administered only on the days and times designated in
this syllabus. If for any reason you cannot comply with these constraints,
please let me know as soon as possible.  

Grades will be calculated according to the following formula:  

  * 25% Midterm Examination (October 15)  

  * 25% Final Examination (December 17)  

  * 15% Critiques  

  * 25% Seminar Presentation and Paper (Paper due December 3)  

  * 10% Class Participation  

  
Books Recommended for Purchase:  

  * B. PorterThe Lion's Share  

  * J. GumpThe Dust Rose Like Smoke  

  * C. AchebeArrow of God  

  * E.M. ForsterA Passage to India  

  * N. wa ThiongoWeep Not Child  

  
Schedule of Topics and Assignments:  

Sept. 10: The American Problem and its Aftermath  

Sept. 17: The Founding of New Societies  

  * Reading:Selections on Canada, Australia, and New Zealand  

Sept. 24: The South African Dilemma  

  * Reading:Selection on South Africa  

  * Reading:Gump, The Dust Rose Like Smoke  

Oct. 1: The "New" Imperialism  

  * Reading:Porter, chs. 1-6  

Oct. 8: The Anglo-Boer War  

Oct. 15: Midterm Examination  

Oct. 22: The Organization of Empire  

  * Reading:Porter, ch. 7  

  * Reading:Achebe, Arrow of God  

Oct. 29: The Problem with India  

  * Reading:Porter, ch. 8  

  * Reading:Forster, Passage to India  

Nov. 5: The Wind of Change  

  * Reading:Porter, ch. 9  

  * Reading:Thiongo, Weep Not Child  

Nov. 12: The Residue of Empire  

  * Reading:Porter, ch. 10  

Nov. 19: Student Seminars  

Nov. 26: Student Seminars  

Dec. 3: Student Seminars (Seminar Papers Due)  

Dec. 17: Final Examination (4:30-6:30 p.m.)  

