Spring 2002



History of Western Civilization II

Hist. H114 Section C326/Section C327 (Honors College)



Time: M/W 9:30-10:45 a.m.                             Dr. Kevin C. Robbins

Place: CA 221                                                   Associate
Professor of History

                                                                          Office: CA 504Q

                                                                          Office Phone: 317-274-5819

                                                                          E-MAIL:[robbin1@iupui.edu](mailto:krobbin1@iupui.edu)                                                                           FAX: 317-278-7800

                                                                          Office Hours: Tue. 9:00 a.m.-Noon

                                                                          (And by Appointment.)



**_Course Objectives_** : A course in the grand history of early modern and
modern western civilization is an excellent and rigorous means by which
students can gain, practice, and master critical reading, critical writing,
critical thinking, and critical, analytical study skills useful for a
lifetime. Among the vital skills to be developed by all students in the
context of this history course are: 1) ease and confidence in oral and written
expression; 2) careful and analytical reading habits developed through contact
with original sources and written masterworks of the eras surveyed; 3) the
ability to read maps, paintings, and other visual media for meaning to develop
a clearer and more well-rounded understanding of our Western Civilization; and
4) effective critical reasoning abilities. Diligent students can expect to
leave this course with not only a better knowledge of important historical
civilizations and events still powerfully shaping the world in which they live
right now, but also a greater knowledge of the fundamental skills of critical
study and argument essential for them to do well in all future university
courses and in all future working environments. The aim of this course is
**not** to fill the student's mind with a mass of useless, memorized, and
quickly forgotten  "facts." History is definitely **not** the mere
accumulation of uncontested  "facts" about prior times and peoples. It is not
(and never has been) an "objective" or un-biased mode of inquiry. History is
an **interpretation** of the past based upon scholars' highly idiosyncratic,
inherently contentious research and analysis of selected surviving evidence
about past, highly complex human beings, human communities, and cultures. Such
investigators, like good detectives, commonly reflect over, question, and
argue about the meaning and implications of all evidence gathered about their
human subjects. In these investigations argument and well-founded, cleverly
asserted opinions matter. All students **must** be ready to question and to
disagree over the meanings, significations, and implications of the readings
assigned and the civilizations they imperfectly communicate to us. All
students must therefore prepare themselves to express their opinions about
course readings and subjects as clearly, directly, and elegantly as possible.
In history, opinions--crafted as interpretations based upon careful analysis
of evidence--matter a great deal. **Your** opinions about what we study are
thus also important and you should be ready to share them in a civil,
intelligent, and determined manner orally and in writing with your instructor
and with your classmates. Following this path, we will work to break common
and pitiful misconceptions held by many about the nature of history and the
value of historical study. Students should thus always expect to have their
opinions challenged and to be pressed in consideration of how history, even
ancient history, continues to shape powerfully their own lives and values
today.

**_Required Course Readings_** : This course will address the institutional,
political, social, and cultural history of human communities in the West (i.e.
Europe) from circa 1500 CE to circa 1945 CE. While a textbook will be part of
the assigned readings, students will also read a number of beautiful,
challenging, provocative, and memorable original works written by authors
living during the time periods covered in the class. Each of these masterworks
is far better reading than any textbook. For quality of instruction about past
human communities, their values, preoccupations, arts, and obsessions, there
can be no better sources than such original texts. That is why we will read
them, discuss them, and pay very careful attention to them in class and in
writing. These original works by great authors, "great books," demand
interpretation so that we may come to see how they represent or communicate to
us information about the societies in which they were written. Be prepared.
The textbook for this course is Jackson J. Spielvogel, _Western Civilization
Since 1300_ , 4th ed. It is abbreviated in the assignments below as **Spiel**.
This textbook will provide a basic narrative of important events during the
periods of history covered. Each assigned chapter or chapter section **must be
read by the date listed below**. This textbook will be supplemented by
readings taken from great masterworks by famous early modern and modern
authors. These additional required readings are (in order of use):



Hillerbrand, Hans, (ed.), _The Protestant Reformation_. Harper and Row, New
York: 1968.

Galileo, Galilei, _Sidereus Nuncius or the Sidereal Messenger._ (A.Van Helden,
trans.),

University of Chicago Press, Chicago: 1989.

Redman, Ben R. (ed.), _The Portable Voltaire_. Penguin Books, New York: 1977.

Wordsworth, William, _Selected Poetry_ (Nicholas Roe, ed.). Penguin Books,
London:

1992.

Engels, Friedrich, _The Condition of the Working Class in England,_ (V.
Kiernan, ed.),

Penguin Books, London: 1987.

Zola, Emile, _The Ladies' Paradise_ , (B. Nelson, trans.), Oxford World's
Classics.

Oxford University Press, Oxford: 1995.

( **NOTE: ALL STUDENTS SHOULD BEGIN READING THIS TEXT AT**

** ONCE AT THE RATE OF APPROX. 30 PAGES PER WEEK. DO NOT **

** WAIT UNTIL WEEKS OF CLASS USE TO READ. THIS IS A GREAT **

** NOVEL. START NOW. YOU'LL LOVE IT--NINETEENTH-**

** CENTURY EUROPEANS DID!)**

Staerck, Christopher, _Battlefront: 1 st July 1916, The First Day of the
Somme_. Public

Record Office, London:1998.

( **NOTE:** This document collection may not as yet be in the IUPUI Book
Store. Do Not Panic. It will be used last in our readings and we can safely
await its arrival. Keep checking for availability or order online.)

All required texts for this course are for sale in the IUPUI Bookstore,
Cavanaugh Hall, Basement, History Section, H114 Shelves--look for the shelf
cards with the instructor's name (Robbins) on them. New and used copies of
these texts may also be acquired from many online book sellers such as
Amazon.com and Barnes and Noble.com. Students should make certain to get the
exact editions of these texts as listed above. **All students must purchase
and read their own copies of the required texts. Buy them all. **

**_Optional Supplemental Course Material from the World Wide Web_ :** Students
should be aware that a vast amount of material highly relevant to the cultural
history of western civilization can be found at various sites on the World
Wide Web. The instructor will be offering a selection of such useful web site
addresses via occasional handouts in class. All students are encouraged to
bring to the instructor's attention relevant new web sites they have found
while pursuing online research. Since all students in both sections of H114
addressed here will be expected to prepare several written essays and papers
on course topics, they should be aware that substantial assistance with the
logistics and forms of university-level writing is also available through
numerous **Online Writing Centers and Workshops**. One of the best such online
writing centers, providing many screens of information on all aspects of paper
organization and composition, can be found through Purdue University. Visit
OWL, Purdue's _O_ nline _W_ riting _L_ ab, at:



http://owl.english.purdue.edu/

**_ _**

**_Course Requirements_** : 1) Regular class attendance ( **one** unexcused
absence will lower your final grade for course participation). If you can not
commit to regular class attendance and always coming to class with the book or
books under discussion, then you should not be in college. Class rosters for
student signature will be circulated at all class sessions. Make certain that
your name is on them. Students missing class will be penalized accordingly.
Students who cannot assure consistent attendance at all class meetings should
drop this class at once; 2) completion of **all** assigned readings **by the
dates listed below** ; 3) completion on time of all assigned supplementary
text media interpretation projects; 4) completion of an in-class Mid-Term
examination comprised of essay questions; 5) completion of a non-comprehensive
Final examination comprised of essay questions; 6) completion on time of two
research papers, one on a topic assigned by the instructor and one on a topic
chosen by the student with the instructor's expressed approval; and 7)
informed participation in all class discussions. All written work submitted
late is subject to severe grade penalties. All written assignments must be
handed in exactly on the date that they are due. No exceptions.



**_Additional Requirements for Honors College Students in Section C327_** :
**** Honors College students in section C327 will be expected to meet all the
requirements above except point 6) on papers. Honors students instead will
write a total of six essays, one paper as assigned on six of the major primary
readings (masterworks) listed above, addressing analytical topics relevant to
each reading given by the instructor. Length and format of essays will be
explained in class handouts. As will be explained, Honors students will have
the possibility of rewriting for improved credit those essays first graded
poorly by the instructor. All Honors Essays must be turned in on time. Late
papers will be graded down. Additionally, Honors College students will arrange
to attend an extra six special required class sessions devoted to intensive
discussion of the assigned masterwork readings. These sessions will be led by
the instructor personally and a hard effort will be made to schedule these
extra sessions at times and places on campus convenient to all Honors
students. Finally, all Honors College students will be required to subscribe
to a special e-mail listserv discussion group to be organized and maintained
by the instructor. Instructions on listserv subscription, required
participation, and activities will be forthcoming. Stay tuned.



**_Course Grading_** :

C326: Mid-Term 10% of final grade; Final 20% of final grade; Media Projects
10%; Papers (2) 45% of final grade; and Class Participation 15% of final
grade.



C327 (Honors): Mid-Term 5% of final grade; Final 10% of final grade; Media
Projects 10%; Papers (6) 60% of final grade; and Class Participation--
including listserv/e-mail--15% of final grade.



COURSE OUTLINE AND ASSIGNMENTS

( **All Readings to be Completed by the Date They Are Listed** )



Mon. 1/7 Course Introduction. Distribution of Syllabus. Explanation of Course

Organization and Requirements. Remarks on Western Civilization as a

"Great Books" course.



Wed. 1/9 Lecture: Late Medieval and Reformation Europe: The Dimensions of the

Historical Problems.

Readings: **Spiel** : Chapter 13, pp. 362-391. ( **START ZOLA READING FOR**

** FUN. THIRTY PAGES A WEEK OF A REAL FRENCH NOVEL IS**

** MUCH BETTER FOR YOU THAN TELEVISION OR DANCING!)**



Mon. 1/14 Lecture/Discussion: What are the documents and the issues of
Europe's

Reformations? What is a religious "Reformation?"

Readings: Hillerbrand, _Protestant Reformation_ , Introduction, pp. xi-xxvii,
and

Documents, pp. 3-43.

Wed. 1/16 Discussion: The Culture and Politics of the Reformations.

Readings: Hillerbrand, _Protestant Reformation_ , Documents, pp. 63-87,
129-136, and

146-152.

**First Text Media Project Distributed in Class.**

**First Honors Paper Topics Distributed in Class**.



Mon. 1/21 **NO CLASSES MLK DAY NO CLASSES**



Wed. 1/23 Lecture/Discussion: The modern _Police_ and the _Protest_ in
Protestantism.

Readings: Hillerbrand, Documents, pp. 172-178 and pp. 222-239.

**First** **Text Media Project Due in Class.**

** **

Mon. 1/28 Lecture: Sixteenth- and Seventeenth-Century Europe: New Horizons,
New

Problems. Readings: **Spiel**., Chapt. 14, pp. 392-401, 408-410, 418-423; and

Chapt. 15, pp. 426-435, 444-458.

**First Honors Essay Due in Class.**



Wed. 1/30 Lecture: The European Scientific Revolution: New Tools of Scientific
Analysis

And New Ways of Conceiving the Cosmos.

Readings, **Spiel**., Chapt. 16, pp. 460-484; and Galileo, _Siderius Nuncius_
,

Introduction, pp. 1-24.

**First C326 Essay Topics Distributed in Class.**

**Second Honors Essay Topics Distributed in Class.**

** **

Mon. 2/4 Discussion: The Documents and Methods of the European Scientific

Revolution. Readings: Galileo, _Siderius Nuncius_ , pp. 25-57.

Wed. 2/6 Discussion: Making and Recording a Scientific Revolution.

Readings: Galileo, _Siderius Nuncius_ , pp. 27-86.



Mon. 2/11 Lecture: The Nature of the European Enlightenments.

Readings: **Spiel**., Chapt. 17, pp. 486-514.

**Second Text Media Project Distributed in Class.**

Wed. 2/13 Lecture/Discussion: Voltaire as the Perfect Enlightened European.

Readings: Redman, _Portable Voltaire_ , Selections from "English Letters,"

pp. 512-530.

**Second Honors Essay Due in Class.**

** **

Mon. 2/18 Discussion: The Contents and Challenges of Voltaire's Enlightened
Literature.

Readings: Redman, _Portable Voltaire_ , "Micromegas," pp. 413-435; and

"Philosophical Dictionary," pp. 58-65, 77-80, 85-87, 90-92, 102-103, 109-116,

131-132, 134-141,152-158, 161-163, 169-172.

**Third Honors Essay Topics Distributed in Class.**

** First C326 Essay Due in Class.**

** **

Wed. 2/20 Discussion: Voltaire's Reflections on Man and Nature.

Readings: Redman, _Portable Voltaire_ , "Lisbon Earthquake," pp. 556-569.

Begin "Candide," in Redman, pp. 229-328.



Mon. 2/25 Lecture/Discussion: The Notable Enlightened Tale of Candide.

Readings: "Candide," in Redman, _Portable Voltaire_ , pp. 229-275.

**Second Text Media Project Due in Class.**



Wed. 2/27 Discussion: The Critical and Subversive Aspects of "Candide."

Readings: Redman, _Portable Voltaire_ , "Candide," pp. 275-328.



Mon. 3/4 **In-Class Mid-Term Examination**



Wed. 3/6 Lecture: Revolution and Romanticism

Readings: **Spiel**., Chapt. 19, pp. 555-580; and Chapt. 21, pp. 610-630 and
636-

641.

**Third Honors Essay Due in Class.**

** **

Mon. 3/11--Fri. 3/15 **SPRING BREAK NO CLASSES SPRING BREAK**

** (TIME TO READ MORE ZOLA. TAKE THE BOOK TO THE BEACH!)**



Mon. 3/18 Lecture/Discussion: English Romantic Poetry: Themes, Problems, and
Protests.

Readings: Wordsworth, _Selected Poetry_ , (Poems TBA).

**Fourth Honors Essay Topics Distributed in Class**.

**Third Text Media Project Distributed in Class.**



Wed. 3/20 Lecture/Discussion: English Romantic Poets: Lyrical Voices for the

Dispossessed. Readings: Wordsworth, _Selected Poetry_ (Poems TBA).



Mon. 3/25 Lecture: European Industrial Revolutions: Rise of Factories, Fall of
Workers.

Readings: ** Spiel**.., Chapt 20, pp. 582-607.



Wed. 3/27 Lecture/Discussion: The Human Toll of Early Modern European
Industrialism.

Readings: Engels, _Condition of the Working Class_ , pp 27-65, begin pp.
65-110.

**Fourth Honors Essay Due in Class.**



Mon. 4/1 Lecture/Discussion: The Politics of Radical Printing in Modern,
Industrializing

Europe. Readings, Engels, _Condition of the Working Class_ , pp. 111-122, 127-

157, and 275-292.

**Final C326 Essay Topics Distributed in Class**.

**Fifth Honors Essay Topics Distributed in Class.**

**Third Text Media Project Due in Class.**



Wed. 4/3 Lecture: European Urban and Mass Society of the Nineteenth Century.

Readings: **Spiel**., Chapt. 23, pp. 678-707; and Chapt. 24, pp. 710-722.



Mon. 4/8 Lecture/Discussion: The Nineteenth-Century Great European Novel as a

Historical Source. Readings: Zola, _Ladies' Paradise._

Wed. 4/10 Lecture/Discussion: Main Themes in the Literary History of Great
European

Capital Cities: Paris in Zola. Readings: Zola, _Ladies' Paradise_.



Mon. 4/15 Lecture: European High Modernity, High Anxieties, and High
Explosives: The

Coming of Catastrophic (but very organized) War. Readings: **Spiel**., Chapt.
24,

pp. 723-745; and Chapt. 25, pp. 747-779.

**Fifth Honors Essay Due in Class.**



Wed. 4/17 Discussion: The Human Experience, Organization, and Cost of World
War I.

Readings: Staerck, _Battlefront 1 st July 1916_, (Selected Documents TBA).

**Sixth Honors Essay Topics Distributed in Class**.



Mon. 4/22 Discussion: How Do You Make Modern War in the Twentieth Century?

What are the modern and bureaucratic implications of making war?

Readings: Staerck, _Battlefront_ , (Selected Documents TBA).



Wed. 4/24 Lecture: Europe 1919-1939: Twenty Years of Truce and Another World
War.

Readings: **Spiel**., Chapt. 26, pp. 781-813.



Mon. 4/29 Lecture: Europe and the Horrors of World War Two. Course Summation
and

Conclusion. Readings. **Spiel**., Chapt. 27, pp. 815-845.

**Final C326 Essay Due in Class.**

** Sixth Honors Essay Due in Class.**



** **

** **

**FINAL EXAMINATION: FRIDAY, MAY 3: 8:00 -- 10:00 a.m. CA 221.**

