**Art History Course Descriptions**

**101.** **History of Western Art Foundations**

An introduction to the visual arts: the nature of visual experience and the
creative process as revealed in painting, sculpture, and architecture with
reference to selected periods in art history.

One-half course credit, spring semester. (not offered in 1999-2000)

> [![](../../gif/bullet.gif)Course Description and
Syllabus](Class%20Pages/art101.html)  
>

**107\. Renaissance and baroque**

This course will be a survey of painting, sculpture, and architecture in
Europe between 1400 and 1750. We will follow the development of a visual
expression which celebratedthe human figure as a basic unit of meaning, and
created a unified pictorial space in which figures could be placed in
significant relation with one another, and which grew increasingly ambitious
in its scale and effect. We will examine patterns of patronage as they shift
from the newly wealthy merchant class of the fifteenth century to the papal
courts of sixteenth century Rome and the absolutist monarchies of seventeenth
century Northern Europe. We will examine the relationship between art and
political and other cultural events of the period. The course will cover the
artistic centers of Northern Europe as well as the Italian cities of Siena,
Florence, Rome and Venice. The vigor of the Renaissance and the visual
complexities of the Baroque will offer us a challenging opportunity to
exercise our powers of description and aesthetic analysis. No Prerequisite.

One course credit, not offered in 2000-2001.

> [![](../../gif/bullet.gif)Course Description and
Syllabus](Class%20Pages/art107.html)



**108\. Neoclassicism, Romanticism, Realism: Art From 1750 to 1863**

This course will examine the major trends in painting and sculpture between
the end of the Baroque age and the beginning of Modernism, an era
characterized by philosophical Enlightenment, political revolution, and
scientific discovery. The art of this turbulent period was often in conflict
with tradition and the established structures of artistic training, production
and patronage; much of our contemporary understanding of the nature and role
of artists and their work was formed in the crucible of this fascinating
period. The dramatically shifting styles of this century of art history will
offer us rich opportunities to develop our tools of formal, descriptive
analysis, and to articulate the connections between visual styles and the
cultural conflicts which produce them. No Prerequisite.

One course credit, spring semester, 2000-2001.

> [![](../../gif/bullet.gif)Course Description and
Syllabus](Class%20Pages/art108.html)



**209\. Modern Art**

This course will survey the history of Modern art from the 1860s to the
present, beginning in Paris, expanding to Europe, and eventually to New York
and beyond. We will ask several questions about the works we look at: What is
modern about modern art? Why does the way art looks change over time, and what
directs that change? What is the relationship between art and the artists and
societies that produce it? What is its relationship to our lives today? Is
Modernism over? To answer these questions, we will look closely at the
artworks themselves, as well as the writings of artists and critics, and the
history of the society and culture that considered itself "modern." No
Prerequisite.

One course credit, fall semester, 2001-2002.

> [ ![](../../gif/bullet.gif)Course Description and
Syllabus](Class%20Pages/Art209.html)



**210\. Special Topics in Art History**

The objective of this class is to develop the student's understanding of art
history. Through the analysis of a particular theme or topic, students will
gain a greater understanding of visual communication and its history. Since
the content of this course varies from year to year, it may be repeated for
credit upon the instructor's approval. Examples of course topics: Building for
the Spirit; Religious Architecture from Antiquity to the Present; Art of the
Indian Subcontinent and of Southeast Asia; Monumentality. Prerequisite: One
previous Art History course.

**Art of the Indian Subcontinent and of Southeast Asia**

This course will examine the art and architecture of the Indian subcontinent
and of Southeast Asia (Cambodia, Thailand, and Vietnam). It will concentrate
primarily on sculpture and architecture produced for a sacred context
(Buddhism, Hinduism, Jainism, Islam), as well as some painting. The course
will cover the time period between roughly 250 BC and the colonial period,
although we will also examine modern (postcolonial) and contemporary art and
architecture.

One course credit, fall semester, 2000-2001.

> [![](../../gif/bullet.gif)Course Description and
Syllabus](Class%20Pages/art210.html)

**Course Descriptions-Studio Art**

**  
120\. Introduction to Studio: 2-D Art Foundations**

The course is designed to help the student learn to work with basic 2
dimensional concepts and their vocabulary. The course investigates the
elements of design, studies the interaction of color, and introduces the
students to freehand drawing. Projects will address conceptual and perceptual
problems through a variety of media. No Prerequisite.  

One course credit, fall semester, 2001-2002.

> [![](../../gif/bullet.gif) Course Description and
Syllabus](Class%20Pages/art10.htm)

**121\. Introduction to Studio: 3-D Art Foundations**

This foundation course will expose the student to basic 3-dimensional concepts
and materials. Through the use of the elements of art and principles of
design, students will create a series of basic sculptural projects. Inherent
in this process is the development of communication skills in a visual
language. Projects will address conceptual and perceptual problems through the
use of cardboard, wire, wood, clay, styrofoam, and plaster. No Prerequisite.  

One course credit, spring semester, 2001-2002.

**122\. Drawing**

This multi-media drawing course will investigate numerous approaches to
creating a two-dimensional image. The course will explore both the historical
and current concepts and materials of drawing, as well as develop a vocabulary
that reflects these issues. The course will also investigate the human figure
as a means of expression with emphasis on proportion, structure, line, value
and other aspects of composition as they relate to drawing. Through experience
in handling several diverse media and exposure to non-western as well as
western art forms, the student will be expected to discover and develop his
own capabilities and powers of observation and execution. No Prerequisite.  

One course credit, spring semester, 2001-2002.

**123\. Ceramics**

An introduction to the basic techniques of clay. The course will investigate
the methods and aesthetics of ceramics, both functional ware and sculptural
form. The course will also explore the historical perception of pottery and
the contemporary uses of clay as a sculptural medium. No Prerequisite.  

One course credit, spring semester, 2001-2002.

**124\. Photography**

Students will be introduced to darkroom techniques and a sensitivity to B/W
photography as a means of visual expression. The principles of design as a
means of visual communication will be an emphasis in the course. The projects
deal with texture, light, and space, with emphasis on the development of
personal ideas. Some photographic history will be discussed, as well as
current issues in art and photography. (Each student must have his own 35-mm
camera with manual controls.)  
In 2000-2001 the photography course will be (in part) a field study course
traveling for three weeks in the late summer into the American West. Students
interested should watch for special organizational meetings prior to
registration. No Prerequisite.  

One course credit, fall semester, 2001-2002.

**225\. Special Topics in Studio**

The objective of this class is to develop the student's ability to think
visually. Through the analysis of a particular theme, topic, medium, or
technique students will gain a greater understanding of visual communication,
creative expression, and its history. Since the content of this course varies
from year to year, it may be repeated for credit upon the instructor's
approval. No Prerequisite.  

One half or one course credit, (Not offered in 2001-2002).

**227\. Sculpture**

An investigation of techniques, procedures, and vocabulary necessary for
three-dimensional visual expression. Three-dimensional design concepts, both
traditional and contemporary, will be explored through applied problems.
Media: plaster, clay, wood, and steel. Prerequisite: Either Art 121 or 123, or
with the consent of the instructor after having taken either Art 120 or 122.  

One course credit, fall semester, 2001-2002.

**228\. Painting**

A continuation of the concerns of Art 120 in exploring and developing the
organization of the two-dimensional surface as it relates to drawing and
design. Media: acrylic and oil pigments. Prerequisite: Art 120 or Art 122 with
consent of instructor.  

One course credit, spring semester, 2001-2002.

**330\. Advanced Studio**

For students wishing to continue in ceramics, drawing, painting, photography,
and sculpture. Emphasis on greater independence in approach to materials,
techniques, and concepts. Prerequisite: Art 120 or 121 & one of the following:
Art 122, 123, 124, 227 or 228.  

One-half or one course credit, fall semester, 2001-2002.

**331\. Advanced Studio**

For students wishing to continue in ceramics, drawing, painting, photography,
and sculpture. Emphasis on greater independence in approach to materials,
techniques, and concepts. Prerequisite: Art 120 or 121 & one of the following:
Art 122, 123, 124, 227 or 228.  

One-half or one course credit, spring semester, 2001-2002.

**387, 388 Independent Study**

Individual research projects. The manner of study will be determined by the
student in consultation with the instructor. Students must receive written
approval of their project proposal from a department member before registering
for the course. Prerequisite: 2 previous art courses and consent of
instructor.  

One-half or one course credit, each semester, 2001-2002.

**432\. Senior Studio**

Art majors must examine a specific visual theme or concept, develop the idea
through his selected mediums, and install an exhibition of the results of that
study. The exhibition may be a one-man or group exhibit, depending on the
requirements of the project and the availability of exhibition space.
Prerequisite: Art 330 or 331 and senior standing.  

One-half or one course credit, fall semester, 2001-2002.

**433\. Senior Studio**

Art majors focusing in studio must examine a specific visual theme or concept,
develop the idea through his selected mediums, and install an exhibition of
the results of that study. The exhibition may be a one-man or group exhibit,
depending on the requirements of the project and the availability of
exhibition space. Prerequisite: Art 330 or 331 and senior standing  

One-half or one course credit, spring semester, 2001-2002.

Copyright (C) 1999 Wabash College  
[Home](../../index.htm) | [Alumni](../../alumni.htm) |
[ArtBASH](../../artbash.htm) | [Curriculum](../../curriculum.htm) |
[Facilities](../../facility.htm) | [Faculty](../../faculty.htm) | [Financial
Aid](../../finaid.htm) | [Gallery  
](../../exhibits.htm)[Permanent Collection](../../permanent_collection.htm)|
[Prospective Students](../../newstudents.htm) | [Student
Gallery](../../art_gallery/index.htm)  
[Wabash College](http://www.wabash.edu/)  
Last Modified:  
Question Comments [calischd@wabash.edu](mailto:calischd@wabash.edu)

