Benedictine University

Undergraduate Core Curriculum/Cultural Heritage Series



Spring 2002



## THE MEDITERRANEAN WORLD



Humn 220/Section C: Tuesday & Thursday 1:30-2:45 p.m.

Benedictine Hall 221



Humn 220/Section D: Tuesday & Thursday 3:00-5:15 p.m.

in Benedictine Hall 221



Instructor: Luigi Manca, Ph.D.





# Course Description



An interdisciplinary examination of the roots of Western Civilization emerging
from the web of cultures located around the Mediterranean Sea. The treatment
of the person in community will provide the unifying theme for the
investigation and for class discussion. Seminar format. Three semester credit
hours.



# General Goals and Outcomes of the Core Curriculum Program



The University's mission statement expresses a commitment to preparing
students for active participation in our increasingly interconnected world.
This is the aim of the four common courses, the First Year Seminar and three
Cultural Heritage courses. They are the heart of Benedictine liberal arts core
curriculum, all linked by the theme of person in Community. A primary
objective of these core courses is to examine various concepts of person and
of community and how these concepts interrelate. This is the first Cultural
Heritage course and is intended to enable students to continue to develop the
abilities necessary to meet the following core goals: (1) to demonstrate an
effective level of cognitive, communicative, and research skills; (2) to
acquire knowledge of the history and heritage of western civilization to
include the contributions of religious faith and philosophical thought to
understanding the individual in community, the relationship of the individual
to society (membership and participation in groups and institutions);
scientific literacy through a knowledge of the history, the methods, and the
impact of science on the individual, society, and the environment; and
artistic and literary heritage; and (3) to develop an understanding of global
society: cultural diversity, mutual relationships, and the interdependence of
peoples and nations.



# General Goals and Outcomes of The Mediterranean World Course



Upon completing this course you are expected to: (1) identify the
Mediterranean region, including Egypt, Greece, Rome, and the Near East,
through maps and trade routes; (2) know the chronology of the ancient period;
comprehend the past, while seeing contemporary connections to it; (3)
recognize the media through which ideas travel; distinguish between oral and
literary traditions; relate modes of communication to space and time; (4)
understand the bases for community in ancient cultures; (5) explore the roles
of myth and cosmology in ancient civilizations; (6) understand the origins of
the scientific/philosophical investigation into the self and the world, and
the ideas of the Good and justice; (7) discuss the distinction between
knowledge and wisdom and the need to balance the two; (8) understand the role
of art and literature in ancient cultures; and (9) continue to show
improvement in your ability to communicate ideas both orally and in writing.



# Specific Goals and Outcomes for My Two Sections of the Course



Each instructor teaching The Mediterranean World is expected to contribute
his/her own special vision of how the general goals and outcomes mentioned
above apply to his/her class. Here is mine:

Geographical knowledge (goal one) is obviously a necessary expectation for
students who have taken this course. In my sections of this course, I would
like this knowledge to go beyond the map and extend to visual images of some
of the fascinating sites of the region.

Historical knowledge (goal two) is also a necessary requirement. In my
sections, I would like to stress the importance of exploring our connections
to the past. I think that understanding these connections is what the whole
Cultural Heritage Series is about.

Understanding media and communication (goal three) is going to be emphasized
in my sections since it relates directly to my own area of expertise (I am a
professor of communication arts), and since I was the one who insisted we
include it when we were designing the course in the early 1990s. What is
especially important to me is that students in my sections develop an
understanding of the role of media in shaping the content of what is passed on
through the millennia, from generation to generation. What we know about our
past in the Mediterranean region we know through some ancient writing on some
ancient media such as stone, clay tablets, papyrus and parchment. Some
materials, such as the hieroglyphic writings on the pyramids, have survived
through the millennia and can be directly available for a specialist to study,
while other texts, such as the Bible, were copied over and over, translated
and re-translated as languages changed, and are now reprinted in English on
paper--a medium that did not exist in the Mediterranean times--so that you and
I can now read and understand them. I also would like the students in my
sections to appreciate the invention of alphabetic writing, one of the
greatest contributions of the ancient Mediterranean world to our own culture
today. As Marshall McLuhan pointed out, with the invention of alphabetic
writing, these ancient people were finally able to reconcile the written word
with the spoken word.

Understanding community (goal four) is central to Benedictine teaching. The
person in community is the pervasive theme for the interdisciplinary
investigation in the Cultural Heritage Series. In my sections, a special
reading The Odyssey should provide some interesting insights into this theme.

The reading of The Odyssey will also provide important insights into the role
of myth and cosmology in the ancient world (goal five), the origins of
scientific, philosophical and religious investigation (goal six), and the
discussion of knowledge and wisdom (goal seven). It will also provide a great
opportunity to really appreciate a major work of literature, which is clearly
related to the understanding of the role of art and literature (goal eight).

Finally, to improve your ability to communicate ideas in writing and orally
(goal nine) is most important to me, a communication arts professor. I was a
strong advocate for including this goal when we were planning the basic common
syllabus. All the five presentations you are to prepare for this class are to
be delivered orally but must be based on a carefully written and carefully
edited script.



# Required Readings



Hollister, C. Warren , et al. The West Transformed. Vol. 1/Part I: The Birth
of the West, Forth Worth, Harcourt College Publishers, 2000

Homer. The Odyssey, translated by E.V. Rieu; revised translation by D.C.H.
Rieu. London: Penguin, 1991

Arrington, Daniel. The Gospel According to Matthew. Collegeville Bible
Commentary, New Testament, no. 1. Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, 1983



# Additional Readings



McCall, Enrietta. Mesopotamian Myths. Austin, TX: University of Texas, 1993

Viviano, Pauline A. Genesis. 1-11. Collegeville Bible Commentary, Old
Testament, no. 2. Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, 1985

Craghan, John F. Exodus. 1:1-24. Collegeville Bible Commentary, Old Testament,
no. 3. Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, 1985

Plato. Great Dialogues of Plato. The Republic, book II, translated by W.H.D.
Rouse. New York: Mentor, 1984

Virgil. The Aeneid. Book IV, translated by Robert Fitzgerald. New York:
Vintage, 1990



# Assignments



In order to receive credit for this course you need to attend all the
scheduled class meetings and deliver the following five presentations in class
on the assigned dates:

1\. A five-minute personal-heritage presentation tracing your own cultural and
intellectual roots (20 percent of the final grade);

2\. A five-minute presentation on an assigned section of The West Transformed
(20 percent of the final grade);

3\. A five-minute presentation on an assigned book of The Odyssey (20
percent);

4\. A five-minute reading of an original creative writing on a topic relating
to any aspect of the course content (20 percent);

5\. A five-minute essay comparing and contrasting Pier Paolo Pasolini's The
Gospel according to Matthew and Monty Python's Life of Brian (20 percent).

The grade for each assignment will be based on the live presentation you
deliver in class. However, you need to produce an original, well thought out
and well edited script. If in the course of a class presentation it becomes
clear that there is no such script, the student will receive an "F" in the
assignment.



# How Your Final Grade Will Be Determined



Each assignment will be evaluated on a scale ranging from "A+" to "F." "A+" is
equivalent to 4.33; "A" to 4.00; "A-" to 3.66; "B+" to 3.33; "B" to 3.0; "B-"
to 2.66; "C+" to 2.33; "C" to 2.0; "C-" to 1.66; "D+" to 1.33; "D" to 1.0; and
"F" to 0.0. At the end of the semester, then, all your scores will be added
together according to the assigned percentage to compute your overall average.
Your overall average will then be transformed into your final grade according
to the following model:



4.00 to 4.33 = A

3.66 to 3.99 = B or A*

3.00 to 3.65 = B

2.66 to 2.99 = C or B*

2.00 to 2.65 = C

1.66 to 1.99 = D or C*

1.00 to 1.66 = D

0.00 to 0.99 = F



* depending on attendance record and class participation



# Attendance Policy



It is my expectation that you will attend all class meetings and that you'll
be there for the entire class period of one hour and fifteen minutes. This is
the same expectation that I have for myself. If you miss five or more classes,
you will not receive a passing grade for the course.



# Policy on Missing Assignments and Missing Instructions



If you miss delivering an assignment by the established deadline, you will
receive an "F" in that assignment. If because of absence or any other reasons
you miss any instructions or information given in class, you are still
responsible for finding out from another student what you missed. You will not
be excused for missing a deadline or failing to properly prepare for an
assignment simply because you were not in class when the information was
given.

** **

**Policy on Academic Dishonesty**



You should not try to pass off as your own other people's ideas, writing or
any other work. Students who attempt to pass off somebody's else's work as
their own will receive an "F" in the assignment and, in addition, will be
penalized of a full point in the final grade.



# Students with Learning Disabilities



If you have a documented learning, psychological, or physical disability, you
may be eligible for reasonable academic accommodations or services. To request
accommodations or services, contact the Academic Resource Center in Kindlon
Hall, Room 249. All students are expected to fulfill essential course
requirements. The University will not waive any essential skill or requirement
of a course or degree program.



# Course Content



This class is delivered through a seminar format. This means that the course
content is provided by student presentations and class discussion. Some of the
student presentations are on topics the student may choose, some are based on
specific reading assignments. For the purpose of organizing all the latter, I
have broken down the required readings into the following units:



### The West Transformed



Unit 1: The West Transformed, pp. xi-xiv

Unit 2: The West Transformed, pp. xxxvii-xlvii

Unit 3: The Wast Transformed, Ch. 1, pp. 5-15

Unit 4: The Wast Transformed, Ch. 1, pp. 15-25

Unit 5: The Wast Transformed, Ch. 1, pp. 25-33

Unit 6: The Wast Transformed, Ch. 1, pp. 33-40

Unit 7: The Wast Transformed, Ch. 2, pp. 45-55

Unit 8: The Wast Transformed, Ch. 2, pp. 55-65

Unit 9: The Wast Transformed, Ch. 2, pp. 65-73

Unit 10: The Wast Transformed, Ch. 3, pp. 77-83

Unit 11: The Wast Transformed, Ch. 3, pp. 83-90

Unit 12: The Wast Transformed, Ch. 3, pp. 90-96

Unit 13: The Wast Transformed, Ch. 3, pp. 97-103

Unit 14: The Wast Transformed, Ch. 3, pp. 103-109

Unit 15: The Wast Transformed, Ch. 4, pp. 113-120

Unit 16: The Wast Transformed, Ch. 4, pp. 120-129

Unit 17: The Wast Transformed, Ch. 4, pp. 129-136

Unit 18: The Wast Transformed, Ch. 4, pp. 136-143

Unit 19: The Wast Transformed, Ch. 5, pp. 147-153

Unit 20: The Wast Transformed, Ch. 5, pp. 153-158

Unit 21: The Wast Transformed, Ch. 5, pp. 158-164

Unit 22: The Wast Transformed, Ch. 5, pp. 165-170

Unit 23: The Wast Transformed, Ch. 5, pp. 170-175

Unit 24: The Wast Transformed, Ch. 5, pp. 175-182



### The Odyssey



Unit 1: The Odyssey, Book 1, pp. 3-16

Unit 2: The Odyssey, Book 2, pp. 17-29

Unit 3: The Odyssey, Book 3, pp. 30-44

Unit 4: The Odyssey, Book 4, pp. 45-69

Unit 5: The Odyssey, Book 5, pp. 70-84

Unit 6: The Odyssey, Book 6, pp. 85-94

Unit 7: The Odyssey, Book 7, pp. 95-105

Unit 8: The Odyssey, Book 8, pp. 106-123

Unit 9: The Odyssey, Book 9, pp. 124-141

Unit 10: The Odyssey, Book 10, pp.142-158

Unit 11: The Odyssey, Book 11, pp.159-178

Unit 12: The Odyssey, Book 12, pp. 179-192

Unit 13: The Odyssey, Book 13, pp. 193-206

Unit 14: The Odyssey, Book 14, pp. 207-222

Unit 15: The Odyssey, Book 15, pp. 223-239

Unit 16: The Odyssey, Book 16, pp. 240-254

Unit 17: The Odyssey, Book 17, pp. 255-272

Unit 18: The Odyssey, Book 18, pp. 273-285

Unit 19: The Odyssey, Book 19, pp. 206-303

Unit 20: The Odyssey, Book 20, pp. 304-315

Unit 21: The Odyssey, Book 21, pp. 316-328

Unit 22: The Odyssey, Book 22, pp. 329-343

Unit 23: The Odyssey, Book 23, pp. 344-354

Unit 24: The Odyssey, Book 24, pp. 355-370



# Course Calendar



Jan. 15 (Tuesday): course explained, syllabus given

Jan. 17 (Thursday): explanation of the course continues; all five presentation
assignments explained; tentative schedule for presentations put together in
class--absolutely don't miss this class!

Jan. 22 (Tuesday): explanation and organization of assignments continue--
absolutely don't miss this class!

Jan. 24 (Thursday): explanation and organization of assignments continue;
presentation schedule finalized--absolutely don't miss this class!

Jan. 29 (Tuesday): personal heritage 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10

Jan. 31 (Thursday): personal heritage 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20

Feb. 5 (Tuesday): personal heritage 21, 22, 23, 24; review

Feb. 7 (Thursday): Mesopotamia (videotape)

Feb. 12 (Tuesday): Egypt (videotape)

Feb. 14 (Thursday): Aegean (videotape)

Feb. 19 (Tuesday): Greece (videotape)

Feb. 21 (Thursday): Rome (videotape)

Feb. 26 (Tuesday): The West Transformed 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10

Feb. 28 (Thursday): The West Transformed 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
20

Mar. 5 (Tuesday): The West Transformed 21, 22, 23, 24; review

Mar. 7 (Thursday): In Search of Troy (videotape); The Search for Ulysses
(videotape)

Mar. 12 (Tuesday): Odyssey 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10

Mar. 14 (Thursday): Odyssey 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20

Mar. 19 (Tuesday): spring break

Mar. 21 (Thursday): spring break

Mar. 26 (Tuesday): Odyssey 21, 22, 23, 24; review

Mar. 28 (Thursday): creative writing 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10

Apr. 2 (Tuesday): creative writing 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20

Apr. 4 (Thursday): creative writing 21, 22, 23, 24; review

Apr. 9 (Tuesday): The Gospel according to Matthew (film)

Apr. 11 (Thursday): The Gospel according to Matthew, continued

Apr. 16 (Tuesday): Life of Brian (film)

Apr. 18 (Thursday): Life of Brian, continued

Apr. 23 (Tuesday): oral essays 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10

Apr. 25 (Thursday): oral essays 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20

Apr. 30 (Tuesday): oral essays 21, 22, 23, 24; review

May 2 (Thursday): final review



# To Contact the Instructor



Office: Kindlon Hall 216

Office Hours: Monday: 2:45-3:45; Tuesday: 4:15-4:45; Wednesday: 2:45-3:45;
Thursday: 4:15-5:15

Telephone: (630) 829-6254

E-mail: <lmanca@ben.edu>

Mail: Manca, Communication Arts, Benedictine University, 5700 College Road,
Lisle, IL 60532

