* * *

#  SYLLABUS

**History 244/695**  
Spring 2000

* * *

This course has long been missing from the Cornell curriculum, yet is clearly
needed to flesh out our offerings in Southeast Asian history. This course
appears superficially to be a broad, survey-type look at the history of
Thailand, somewhat like my book on that subject written in the 1970s and
published in 1984. In fact, however, it is intended to work towards an
alternative to "national" history, an approach that does violence to the
realities of a past in which the "nation" did not exist. I intend to work at
this by taking _not_ the present national boundaries implicitly to define the
unit of our study, but instead by defining our object of study as the zones of
shared experience which scattered across the map in greater or lesser numbers
until quite recent times (the late twentieth century, in fact).

This course will focus especially on the evidence for the history of what we
now call "Thailand"--that is, "How do we know what we think we know?" We will
therefore be working with a broad range of historical sources, ranging from
stone inscriptions to modern newspapers. Of necessity (or out of fairness to
make the course accessible to all students) we will therefore utilize sources
in translation, although this is not intended to prevent students from
utilizing any language skills they may possess.

This course is likely to attract a variety of students, both undergraduate and
graduate students, in different fields and at varying levels of competence.
Students may register for the course either as History 244 (intended mainly
for undergraduates) or as History 695 (graduate students). Both groups will
assemble together for lectures Tuesdays (11:40 to 12:55), but the Thursday
meetings will divide the 244 students (Thursdays 11:40 to 12:55) and the 695
students (Thursday afternoons at a mutually-agreeable time, probably
4:00-5:15).

The syllabus for this course is not finally set, and the latter sessions/weeks
of the term will be decided in consultation among all involved within the
first month.

Students will be asked to undertake a broad variety of work in the course. The
first assignment will be to do some basic geographical work, utilizing books
of photographs, and maps, choosing one region of the Thailand/Siam region and
speaking (not more than 5 minutes) about it to the group as a whole. A second
assignment will be to write a short paper (up to 5 pages, or 1,250 words)
about a historical problem. The third project will be to write a longer paper
(up to 12 pages, or 3,000 words) on a historical problem, utilizing primary
sources in translation. You may expect to be asked to present a synopsis of
your research (up to 10 minutes) in a late session of the class. There will be
no final examination. Final typed versions of your presentation will be due by
the end of classes.

Just to give you some indication of what I will be looking for in the final
class projects, here are some (perhaps fanciful!) examples:

1) The nature of society on the evidence of the Bang Sanuk Inscription of the
early thirteenth century.

2) How fearsome was early warfare? (Based on a comparison of the royal
chronicles with the accounts of Western visitors in the 17th century.)

3) Were women powerful or weak in pre-modern Siam? (Based on translated Thai
sources, and/or Western visitors.)

4) What was meant when people spoke of "Siamese"? In the 18th century? In the
19th century? In the 20th century?

5) How did the Bangkok establishment react to news of the Burmese defeat in
1826 in the First Anglo-Burmese War? (We have evidence from an English
visitor.)

6) When King Chulalongkorn appointed his brothers as Cabinet ministers, was he
being a nepotist? Why did he do it?

7) Why didn't the Promoters of the Coup of 1932 end the Thai monarchy?

8) Was Field Marshal Sarit just playing at being "fire chief" when he dashed
out to big fires in Bangkok?

9) What has been the role of money from the narcotics trade in Thai politics
since World War II?

There are considerable sources on these and many other questions, available in
English translation (or in other languages, depending on what you can use). Be
sure you clear your topic with the instructor, who will also help you to
identify and obtain sources.

**Readings.** It may appear that the readings required of students attending
this course are skimpy. This is only partly because there are severe limits on
how much suitable material is available in English. We will have required
readings each week that will include general readings (often from Wyatt's own
book on the subject) as well as readings from primary sources. The former are
intended as introduction to the latter--that is, read _Thailand: A Short
History_ as a background to the primary sources; and read the primary sources
_very_ carefully in order to get the maximum information from them. As we
shall see, even a short stone inscription can be discussed for hundreds of
hours and thousands of pages! Come to class on Thursdays prepared to argue
about, or at least discuss, the primary sources assigned for that week.

**Consultations.** Wyatt will be available for office hours Tuesdays 2-4 in
431 McGraw; and at any time by e-mail (dkw4@cornell.edu), or by appointment.
Most mornings he can be found in the Temple of Zeus roughly between 8:30 and
9:30!

**NOTE: WYATT WILL MISS THE FIRST TWO MEETINGS OF THE CLASS, BECAUSE HE WILL
BE CHAIRING A SYMPOSIUM IN THAILAND IN HONOR OF THE LATE A. THOMAS KIRSCH (JAN
28). YOU SHOULD LOG ON TO COURSE MATERIALS ON THE WEB.** **PRELIMINARY COURSE
OUTLINE**

Tues 25 Jan  
Thurs 27 Jan 1. Introduction; semester schedule; outline

Tues 1 Feb 2. Lecture: The Setting  
Thurs 3 Feb 3. Geographical exercise--photographs and maps

Tues 8 Feb 4. Lecture: Our Earliest Evidence--Stone Inscriptions  
Thurs 10 Feb 5. The Ram Khamh aeng Inscription (AD 1292?)

Tues 15 Feb 6. Lecture: The Beginnings of Ayudhya  
Thurs 17 Feb 7. The Royal Chronicles of Ayutthaya (to 1448)

Tues 22 Feb 8. Lecture: Wars of Kings? or of Kingdoms?  
Thurs 24 Feb 9. Sixteenth Century, Siam and the Farang

Tues 29 Feb 10. Lecture: What are Farang Sources Good For (and Not)?  
Thurs 2 Mar 11. Seventeenth-Century Farang Visitors: La Loubere

Tues 7 Mar 12. Lecture: How Far can we Take Economic History?  
Thurs 9 Mar NO MEETING: AAS MEETING IN SAN DIEGO

Tues 14 Mar 13. Why Did Ayudhya Fall?  
Thurs 16 Mar 14. Why Did Ayudhya Fall? The Evidence of the Chronicles

Mar 18-26 "SPRING" BREAK Tues 28 Mar 15. Lecture: Reading Sources Between the
Lines  
Thurs 30 Mar 16. How Did the Thai React to Burma's Defeat in 1826?

Tues 4 Apr 17. Lecture: Mind-Reading and Such Clairvoyance  
Thurs 6 Apr 18. Mongkut and Bowring in 1855: What Was Going On?

Tues 11 Apr 19. Lecture: Hagiography and Political Dangers  
Thurs 13 Apr 20. The Front Palace Crisis of 1875, Documents

Tues 18 Apr 21. Lecture: What Accounts for Changes in Thai Monarchy?  
Thurs 20 Apr 22. King Prajadhipok, 1925-1935: Absolute?

Tues 25 Apr 23. Lecture: What Really Happened on Pearl Harbor Day?  
Thurs 27 Apr 24. Thailand, Japan, and World War II

Tues 2 May 25. Student presentations  
Thurs 4 May 26. Student presentations; and Summary

* * *

Return to top of this page.  
[Back to Index](index.html)

* * *

_This page last updated 30 Aug 1998._

