Michael Winship

25\. The American Book in the Industrial Era: 1820-1914

17-21 July 1995

  
This course will explore manufacturing methods, distribution networks, and
publishing patterns introduced in the United States during the industrial era.
A major part of the course will consist of small, supervised laboratory
sessions in which students will examine, analyze, and describe books produced
during the period. The course will also introduce students to bibliographical
practice and conventions as they apply to these books.

  
  
1. _How useful were the pre-course readings?_

  
**1:** I found them very useful, if confusing at times, as a newcomer to the
discipline. It was unfortunate that the revised list was not distributed
before class. **2:** Instructor indicated that we were sent the wrong reading
list. Compared to the revised list he handed out in class, the original list
of pre-course readings set a different tone for the course. I felt that,
overall, the pre-course readings were very essential. **3:** Our class was
mailed the wrong pre-course reading list. This wasn't a huge problem (there
was a lot of overlap in the readings), but it was nonetheless an unfortunate
mistake. The readings were useful and I will forever more use the assigned
texts as reference tools. **4:** We were sent the wrong list. Based on the
list received, the readings were good, although not exactly always riveting.
The assignment was good and very helpful in making me _think_ about the
value/applicability of various bibliographic approaches. They did, however,
make me a bit nervous about the overall content of the course. I feared I
might have gotten into a bibliography course, which wouldn't have been what I
wanted.  
  
  
2\. _Did your instructor prepare sufficiently to teach THIS course? Were the
course syllabus and other materials distributed in class useful?_

  
**1:** Yes, especially for the bibliography (I'm eager to get started on it).
**2:** Yes -- do appreciate the bibliography handed out. It will prove useful.
**3:** The bibliography, like the pre-course reading list, will be an
invaluable tool for me. Other handouts were also helpful and unique in terms
of other courses I've had. **4:** The syllabus was well thought out and the
reading list complete. I especially appreciate the latter. I also enjoyed
being able to **_see_** copies of germane books.

3\. _Was the intellectual level of the course content appropriate?_

  
1-2: Yes. **3:** Yes. There were disciplinary boundaries in the classroom that
proved both interesting and challenging in terms of class discussion. **4:**
_Yes._

  
  
4\. _If your course had field trips, were they effective?_

  
**1:** Absolutely. These trips were among the highlights of the week for me.
**2:** Yes. **3:** Yes. We visited the _Lucile_ exhibit and looked at many
volumes of _Leaves of Grass_ in Special Collections. This kind of hands-on
experience with primary resources was a first for me and very enlightening.
**4:** We visited _Lucile_ in the Rotunda. It was a bit overwhelming, but
interesting and appropriate to what we were studying. We also went to Special
Collections. The discussion based around _Leaves of Grass_ was enhanced by
having the various incarnations of it on hand to look at.

  
  
5\. _Did the actual course content correspond to its RBS brochure description
and Expanded Course Description? Did the course in general meet your
expectations?_

**1:** Yes, in fact the course exceeded my expectations, was richer in its
coverage of the c19 processes than the brochure's description had led me to
expect. **2:** Yes. **3:** The course description was a bit misleading, I now
think. I was more interested in taking a course with MW than I was in the
material, so I didn't pay too much attention to the descriptions. But, in
hindsight, the course was more about book production, distribution,  &c., than
about bibliography; the latter is mentioned in the descriptions, while the
others are only implied. **4:** I can't remember the course description, but
it was good enough to entice me when what I really wanted to take was
Lithography or Papermaking. I'm very pleased I chose this course. It was just
what I needed.

  
  
6\. _What did you like best about the course?_

  
**1:** I very much liked the relaxed give-and-take nature of the class, the
mixture of anecdotes, discussion, and straight lecture was engaging and
thought-provoking. It was well-paced, but flexible. [I especially liked] the
Whitman field trip [and the] discussion of southeast Asian printing history,
especially its Thai aspects. **2:** Discussion of early printing in Thailand.
**3:** Discussion of early printing history in Thailand. Would like to learn
more! How about an evening lecture next summer (an inside class joke).
Seriously speaking, I was thrilled just to soak up anything MW had to say. His
knowledge is vast and in areas in which the faculty at my home institution are
lacking. **4:** The size of the class. The breadth of the instructor's
knowledge. That there was an array of representative books to look at in the
classroom, to be used to compare texts, as resource texts. That the instructor
used anecdotes from his experience to illustrate points, eg, the c19 bindery
with slides and the early printing history in Thailand.

  
  
7\. _How could the course have been improved?_

  
**1:** I would have enjoyed (even) more supervised hands-on work with the
books of the period. I think the time scheduled for labs should be a bit more
structured and/or students advised before the course begins to bring a
project. **2:** More time [:)]. Enjoyed the course immensely! **3:** The
course was wonderful. I really can't imagine how it could have been any
better. I learned more in one week that I have in one semester of graduate
school!

  
  
8\. _Any final thoughts?_

  
**1:** I thought it was **_excellent,_** a good survey course, in which I
learned a great deal about the hand press era as well as the c19. I enjoyed
myself thoroughly; in fact, not a dull moment for me. And although I intended
at the onset that this trip to RBS be my first and only (a fun excursion), I'm
already trying to decide what I want to take next year! I'm tired, but hate to
see the week end. **2:** I would encourage future participants to do the
reading and definitely bring ideas and/or projects or problems to class. I was
not focussed on precise issues, but learned a tremendous amount in many areas.
I would recommend the course to anybody interested in c19 American books. I
enjoyed hearing different perspectives on issues and appreciated my exposure
to the use of various resources,  &c. **3:** This is a great survey class for
anyone who needs an overview of the Industrial Era in America. Just get plenty
of rest before you arrive. RBS is exhilarating, but also exhausting! I can't
wait until next year! **4:** Rewrite the course description for this course.
It's really an overview of the impact of technological changes in the
Industrial Era on all aspects of books from production to distribution. Ditch
the references to British books and the emphasis on bibliography.

  
  
Number of respondents: **4**

  
Percentages

  

### Leave

|

### Tuition

|

### Housing

|

### Travel  
  
---|---|---|---  
Institution gave me leave | Institution paid tuition | Institution paid
housing | Institution paid travel  
50% | 50% | 25% | 25%  
|  |  |  
I took vacation time | I paid tuition myself | I paid for my own housing | I
paid my own travel  
0% | 25% | 50% | 50%  
|  |  |  
N/A: Self-employed, retired, &c. | N/A: Self-employed or retired | N/A: Stayed
with friends or at home | N/A: Lived nearby | 50% | 25% | 25% | 25%  
  
There were two full-time students (50%), one archivist/manuscript librarian
(25%), and one general librarian with unspecified rare book duties (25%).

* * *

_Email us your comments[about RBS](/oldbooks/rbs/contacts.html) or [about this
Website](mailto:%20oldbooks@virginia.edu)  
[(C)](http://www.virginia.edu/oldbooks/privacy.html) [Rare Book
School](http://www.rarebookschool.org) at the [University of
Virginia](http://www.virginia.edu)  
Last Modified: Wednesday, 06-Feb-2002 13:23:27 EST_  

