**University of Hawai'i at Manoa Department of Anthropology**

**

* * *

**|

[**Site Map**](../../sitemap.htm)  
  
---  
  
[ **Home Page**](../../default.html)  
  
[ **Archaeology**](../../subfields/archpage.html)  
  
[ **Cultural Anthropology**](../../subfields/cultpage.html)  
  
[ **Discursive Practices**](../../subfields/discpage.html)  
  
[ **Ecological Anthropology**](../../subfields/ecopage.html)  
  
[ **Medical Anthropology**](../../subfields/medpage.html)  
  
[ **Physical Anthropology**](../../subfields/phypage.html)  
  
[ **Degree Programs**](../../degrees.htm)  
  
[ **Majoring in Anthropology**](../../degrees.htm#major)  
  
[ **Faculty and Staff**](../faculty.htm)  
  
[ **Faculty Honors and Awards**](../../awards.htm)  
  
[ **Special Projects**](../../projects/projects.htm)  
  
[ **Classes**](../../classes/coursepage.htm)  
  
[ **Colloquia**](../../colloquia.htm)  
  
[ **Graduate Students**](../../gradstudents/gradstudents.htm)  
  
[ **MA and PhD alumni**](../../alumni/phds.htm)  
  
[ **Openings and Financial Aid**](../../openings/openings.htm)  
  
[ **Living in Hawai'i**](../../livinghawaii.htm)  
  
[ **Frequently Asked Questions**](../../questions.htm)  
  
* * *

[**Faculty**](../faculty.htm)

  * [**Andrew Arno**](../Arno/arno.htm)
  * [**James Bayman**](../bayman/bayman.htm)
  * [**Jack Bilmes**](../bilmes/bilmes.htm)
  * [**Fred Blake**](../blake/blake.htm)
  * [**Alice Dewey**](../dewey/dewey.htm)
  * [**Nina Etkin**](../etkin/etkin.htm)
  * [**Michael Graves**](../graves/graves.htm)
  * [**Bion Griffin**](../griffin/griffin.htm)
  * [**Terry Hunt**](../hunt/hunt.htm)
  * [**Gregory Maskarinec**](../maskarinec/maskarinec.htm)
  * [**Michael Pietrusewsky**](../pietrusewsky/pietrusewsky.htm)
  * [**Barry Rolett**](../rolett/rolett.htm)
  * **Leslie Sponsel**
  * [**Miriam Stark**](../stark/stark.htm)
  * [**Geoffrey White**](../white/white.htm)
  * [**Christine Yano**](../yano/yano.htm)
  * [**Heather Young Leslie**](../youngleslie/youngleslie.htm)

**Emeritus Faculty**

  * [**Ben Finney**](../finney/finney.htm)
  * [**Alan Howard**](../howard/Howard.html)
  * [**Takie Lebra**](../lebra/lebra.htm)

**Adjunct Faculty**

  * [**Jan Rensel**](../rensel/rensel.html)

**Secretary:** [**Elaine Nakahashi**](../nakahashi/nakahashi.htm)

**Student Services:** [**Mary Ambrose**](../tugaoen/tugaoen.htm)

#### |

##  Leslie E. Sponsel  
Professor  
  
---  
  
![](sponsel.jpg)

|

 **Background:** B.A. in geology, Indiana University, 1965; M.A. in
anthropology, Cornell University, 1973; Ph.D. in anthropology, Cornell
University, 1981

Also summer courses in linguistics at University of Oklahoma, primate field
research in Ethiopia from New York University, and nutritional field research
methods at Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Previously visiting instructor or professor at Indiana U, U Saskatchewan
(Saskatoon), Mount Royal College (Calgary), Cornell U, U Massachusetts
(Amherst), Venezuelan Institute of Scientific Investigations (Caracas), and
Prince of Songkla U (Pattani, Thailand). Joined the faculty at the University
of Hawai'i in 1981  
  
 **Interests:**

  * Mainland Southeast Asia (southern Thailand) and Amazon (Venezuela) 
  * Biological and cultural ecology of foraging, tropical forest ecosystems and deforestation 
  * Biodiversity studies in relation to cultural diversity, cultural ecology, historical ecology, and sacred places 
  * [Anthropology of religion, spiritual ecology, Buddhist and Islamic ecology, sacred places and biodiversity conservation](../../projects/thailand/spiritualecology.htm)
  * Anthropology of nonviolence, peace, violence, and war 
  * Cultural change, human rights, and advocacy anthropology 

* * *

**Past and Current Research:**

> 1974-81 various field trips to the Venezuelan Amazon to work with Sanema
(northern Yanomami subgroup), Ye'kuana, and Curripaco

>

> 1986- various summer field trips to southern Thailand to compare the
cultural and spiritual ecology of adjacent Buddhist and Muslim communities

>

> A diversity of research interests is reflected in the list of publications
below, but my main current and near future interest is in fieldwork in
Thailand on the role of sacred places in biodiversity conservation and on
Buddhist ecology including monks as environmental activists

    Among other grants, Fulbright Fellowship for summers 1994-95 in the Biology Department of Prince of Songkla University (Pattani, Thailand) 

* * *

**Recent Publications:**

2002 "Buddhist Views of Nature and Environment" (with Poranee Natadecha-
Sponsel) in _Nature Across Cultures: Non-Western Views of Nature and
Environment,_ Helaine Selaine, ed., Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer
Academic Publishers (in press).

2002, "Monkey Business? The Conservation Implications of Macaque
Ethnoprimatology in Southern Thailand," (With Nukul Ruttanadakul and Poranee
Natadecha-Sponsel), in _Primates Face to Face: The Conservation Implications
of Human-Nonhuman Primate Interconnections,_ Agustin Fuentes and Linda Wolfe,
eds., New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, pp. 288-309.

2002 _Sanctuaries of Culture and Nature: Sacred Places and Biodiversity,_ L.E.
Sponsel, ed. (Under review)

2001 "Do Anthropologists Need Religion, and Vice Versa? Adventures and Dangers
in Spiritual Ecology," _New Drections in Anthropology and Environment:
Intersections_ , Carole Crumley, ed., Walnut Creek, CA: Alta Mira Press, pp.
177-200.

2000 "Is Indigenous Spiritual Ecology a New Fad? Reflections from the
Historical and Spiritual Ecology of Hawai'i," in _Indigenous Traditions and
Ecology_ , John Grim, ed., Harvard University Press, pp. 159-174.

2001 "Advocacy in Anthropology," _International Encyclopedia of the Social and
Behavioral Sciences,_ Elsevier Press. (In press)

2001 "Human Impact on Biodiversity, Overview," in _Encyclopedia of
Biodiversity_ 3:395-409, __San Diego, CA: Academic Press. Simon Levin, Editor-
in-Chief.

2000 "Peoples, Identitites, Ecologies, and Rights: All Endangered," In
[_Endangered Peoples of Southeast and East Asia: Struggles to Survive and
Thrive_](bkendangered.htm), L.E. Sponsel, ed., Greenwood Publishing Group, pp.
1-22. .

2000 editor of [_Endangered Peoples of Southeast and East Asia: Struggles to
Survive and Thrive_](bkendangered.htm) _,_ Greenwood Publishing Group, Inc.

1998 "The Historical Ecology of Thailand: Increasing Thresholds of Human
Environmental Impact from Prehistory to the Present," in _Advances in
Historical Ecology_ , William Balee, ed., Columbia University Press, pp.
376-404.

1998 "Sacred and/or Secular Approaches to Biodiversity Conservation in
Thailand," special issue of journal _Worldviews: Environment, Culture,
Religion_ 2(2):155-167.

1998 "Yanomami: An Arena of Conflict and Aggression in the Amazon" special
issue of the journal _Aggressive Behavior_ 24(2):97-122.

1997 "The Human Niche in Amazonia: Explorations in Ethnprimatology," in _New
World Primates: Ecology, Evolution, and Behavior,_ Warren Kinzey, ed., Aldine
de Gruyter, pp. 143-165.

1997 with Poranee Natadecha-Sponsel, "A Theoretical Analysis of the Potential
Contribution of the Monastic Community in Promoting a Green Society in
Thailand," in _Buddhism and Ecology: The Interconnection of Dharma and Deeds,_
M.E. Tucker and W.R. Williams, eds., Harvard University Center for the Study
of World Religions, pp. 45-68.

1997 "The Master Thief: Gold Mining and Mercury Contamination in the Amazon,"
in _Life and Death Matters: Human Rights and the Environment at the End of the
Millennium,_ B.R. Johnston, ed., Altamira Press, pp. 99-127.

1997 articles on "Ecological Anthropology, "Julian Steward,""Peace and
Nonviolence," and "Human Rights," in _The Dictionary of Anthropology,_ T.
Barfield, ed., Blackwell Publishers.

1996 "The Natural History of Peace: A Positive View of Human Nature and its
Potential," in _A Natural History of Peace,_ T. Gregor, ed., Vanderbilt U
Press, pp. 95-125.

1996 co-editor with T.N. Headland and R. C. Bailey, __[ _Tropical
Deforestation: The Human Dimension_](bkdeforestation.htm) _,_ Columbia U
Press.

1995 ed., [_Indigenous Peoples and the Future of Amazonia: An Ecological
Anthropology of an Endangered World_](bkamazonia.htm) _,_ U Arizona Press.

1994 "The Yanomamo Holocaust Continues," in _Who Pays the Price?: Examining
the Sociocultural Context of the Environmental Crisis,_ B.R. Johnston, ed.,
Island Press, pp. 37-46.

1994 co-editor with T. Gregor, [_Anthropology of Peace and
Nonviolence_](bkpeace.htm) _,_ Lynne Rienner Publishers.

* * *

**Current Publishing Projects**

  * Editor of _Gold, Oil, Environment, People, and Rights in the Amazon_
  * Author of _Ecocide or Ecosanity?: An Ecological Anthropology of Diversity._
  * Author of _Lost World: Evolution, Ecology and Culture in Tropical Forests._

* * *

**Courses taught:**

_Anth 200 Cultural Anthropology_

> Cultural anthropology is the humanistic and scientific documentation,
explanation, and celebration of the cultural diversity and unity of humankind.
This semester cultural anthropology and cultural phenomena are surveyed
through lecturers and class discussions within the ecological and historical
framework of tribes, states, and the global system, and with an emphasis on
the human rights of contemporary indigenous societies and ethnic minorities.
Student panel discussions of case studies will analyze contrasting
anthropological images of the Yanomami society in the Amazon of Brazil and
Venezuela. The instructor will discuss his own firsthand research with the
Yanomami. The course grade is based on a panel discussion of a case study,
quizzes, and a final take-home essay examination.

_Anth 307 Contemporary Theory_

> Cultural relativism has been one of the core concepts of cultural
anthropology since the Boasians, but in recent years its validity and utility
have been increasingly challenged within the profession. The concept also has
practical applications beyond anthropology; for example, governments accused
of serious human rights abuses have even tried to use cultural relativism as a
defense. This course will systematically and critically analyze in depth the
theoretical issue of universalism versus relativism within anthropology and as
it applies to basic concepts about human rights. Human rights will also be
examined in cross-cultural perspective including emic and well as etic
aspects. The format for the course is a combination of lecture and seminar
including student panel discussions of case studies. The grade is based on
panel discussions of case studies, a take-home final essay examination
(following the revision and further development of a mid-term draft), and
class attendance and participation.

_Anth 340 Primate Behavior and Ecology_

> During the first third of the semester the class will survey naturalistic
field research on the undisturbed ecological and social actions of free-
ranging primate populations in their natural habitats through lectures
(including guest speakers), the Bramblett text, journal articles, case
studies, videos and slides. Also the instructor will discuss his own field
research on vervet monkey ecology in the Awash of Ethiopia, squirrel monkey
conservation in the Columbian Amazon, Yanomami predation on monkeys in the
Venezuelan Amazon, and the ethnoprimatology of macaques in southern Thailand.
During the remaining two thirds of the semester the class will focus mainly on
exploring the boundaries of human/ape and violence/nonviolence through in-
depth discussion of a recent synthesis (Wrangham-Peterson) and a series of
student panel discussions of case studies on gorillas, common chimpanzees,
bonobos (pygmy chimpanzees), and orangutans. We will also probe the moral
boundary between humans and apes as well as the violence which humans commit
against apes by discussing the essays in The Great Ape Project. Finally, we
will critically analyze from a primatological perspective phenomena at the
boundary between science and fiction including Yeti (Bigfoot, Sasquatch),
isolated feral humans, and extraterrestrials. [**Syllabus**](340syllabus.htm)

_Anth 345 Aggression, War & Peace_

> Topics include nonviolence and peace, the natural history of peace, cross-
cultural comparison of relatively nonviolent and peaceful societies, cultural
variation in conflict resolution, human rights, the future of nonviolence,
peace, and human rights. [**Syllabus**](345syllabus.htm)

_Anth 385C Undergraduate Proseminar: Internet Anthropology_

> This seminar will explore _internet_ and _cyber anthropology_ along two
tracks:

>

>> (1) a critical analysis of three ethnographic studies about the internet
with special attention to the research methods that they employed; and

>>

>> (2) student presentations reporting on critical analyses and applications
of anthropological information discovered during homework and research on the
internet.

_Anth 415 Ecological Anthropology_

> Ecological anthropology surveys the history, theory, methods, and data of
the subject, including: the decisive role of culture in mediating the
interaction between human populations and the ecosystems in their habitat; how
people manipulate and transform natural environments; environmental problems,
issues, and discourses from various perspectives of sociocultural anthropology
and in relation to human rights; and the mutual relevance of anthropology and
the green movement. The class format includes a series of lectures drawn from
chapters in the instructor's book manuscript (see below); open discussion of
the required texts; student panel discussions of case studies; slides from the
instructor's fieldwork in the Venezuelan Amazon and southern Thailand; and
selected videos. The course grade is based on regular quizzes, panel
discussions, and student participation. [**Syllabus**](415syllabus.htm)

_Anth 422 Anthropology and Religion_

> What is spiritual ecology and who are its pioneers? Are indigenous people
spiritual ecologists? What are the arguments for and against linking religion
and ecology? What is Buddhist ecology and why have many monks turned from
individual meditation to environmental activism? What are sacred places and do
they have any ecological or conservation significance? These and many other
questions are explored, critically analyzed, and debated in this course. After
a series of introductory lectures surveying the anthropology of religion, the
course will successively focus on spiritual ecology, Buddhist ecology, and
sacred places through open discussion of the required texts, panel discussions
of case studies, selected videos, and guest speakers. The instructor will also
discuss with slides his related fieldwork in Venezuela, New Mexico and in
Thailand with biology colleagues, and his participation and observations in
Harvard conferences on spiritual ecology and at UNESCO in Paris on sacred
places and biodiversity conservation. Researchers currently involved in the
recreation of Kaho'olawe as a sacred place will discuss their work. Each
student is required to conduct and report on a modest research project on some
aspect of sacred places in nature in Hawai'i. [**Syllabus**](422syllabus.htm)

_Anth 423 Social and Cultural Change_

> Violence and war as agents of social and cultural change, colonialism and
indigenous peoples, human rights and advocacy anthropology, fieldwork on
violence and in violent situations, politics and ethics of anthropology.
[**Syllabus**](423syllabus.htm)

_Anth 435 Human Adaptation to Forests_

> This course focuses on the changing niches of humans and anthropology in
tropical forests and in relation to human environmental crises like
deforestation and mining. The main approaches are ecological anthropology,
historical ecology, radical ecology, critical ethnography, and advocacy
anthropology and human rights. We will examine the myths of ecology and the
ecology of myths regarding indigenous peoples, their warfare, and their
adaptations and conservation practices in tropical forests. In a special
segment we will examine societies which are supposed to be unusually violent
(Yanomami, Waorani) and others which are supposed to be unusually nonviolent
(Semai, Mbuti). However, most attention is given to the Amazon and especially
the Yanomami, based on the instructor's fieldwork and publications.
[**Syllabus**](435syllabus.htm)

_Anth 620H Human Ecology_

> This course focuses on the relationship between cultural ecology,
biodiversity, and deforestation in Southeast Asia. This focus is explored in
four parts: (1) class discussion of books by Ellen, Wilson, and World
Resources Institute; (2) individual or panel discussions by students of their
choice from the remainder of the books on the list below; (3) a series of
informal seminars presented by six anthropologists (mostly from the East-West
Center); and (4) student reports summarizing library research papers. This
suggested orientation may be modified depending on the needs and interests of
the particular students enrolled in the class.

**Note:** Courses are regularly revised and often completely reoriented each
time given. The above summaries are therefore subject to change.

* * *

**Additional Information:**

Director of the Ecological Anthropology Program

Served as Chair of the Commission for Human Rights and the subsequent
Committee for Human Rights of the American Anthropological Association

Regularly participate in 2-4 national and international conferences each year,
regularly organize and chair a session at the annual meeting of the American
Anthropological Association

Twice awarded UH Excellence in Teaching Award

* * *  
  
[Site Map](../../sitemap.htm) |  [Home](../../default.html) |  [Cultural
Anthropology](../../subfields/cultpage.html) |
[Archaeology](../../subfields/archpage.html) |  [Physical
Anthropology](../../subfields/phypage.html) |  [Discursive
Practices](../../subfields/discpage.html) |  [Medical
Anthropology](../../subfields/medpage.html) |  [Ecological
Anthropology](../../subfields/ecopage.html) |  [Degree
Programs](../../degrees.htm) |  [Faculty and Staff](../faculty.htm) |
[Projects](../../projects/projects.htm) |
[Classes](../../classes/coursepage.htm) |  [Graduate
Students](../../gradstudents/gradstudents.htm) |  [Past MAs &
PhDs](../../alumni/phds.htm) |  [Openings & Financial
Aid](../../openings/openings.htm) |  [Faculty Honors and
Awards](../../awards.htm) |  
[Living in Hawai'i](../../livinghawaii.htm) |  [FAQ](../../questions.htm)  
---

