### HISTORY 540.03  
THE OTTOMAN EMPIRE, 1300-1800



COURSE OBJECTIVES

The Ottoman Empire was the longest-lasting Islamic empire and the only one to
figure as a major power in the history of both Europe and the Islamic world.
This course traces the history of the empire from its origins as an obscure
band of frontier warriors, to the highpoint of its geopolitical power in the
sixteenth century, and on to its further evolution as an increasingly complex
and peaceful society, down to the opening of the period of European
imperialism and rapid change (roughly 1800).

This course considers not only the Ottomans' political power, but also those
economic, social, and cultural factors that helped explain that power and gave
the empire such a distinctive place in the annals of Europe as well as of the
Islamic world. The course also examines the Ottoman Empire as a case from
which to study the developmental dynamics of patrimonial sociopolitical
systems in general.

STUDENT RESPONSIBILITIES

The course includes one midterm (identification and essay questions), one
paper assignment, and a comprehensive final examination (again, identification
and essay questions).

The paper assignment will take as its subject _The Intimate Life of an Ottoman
Statesman: Melek Ahmed Pasha (1588-1662) as Portrayed in Evliya Celebi's_
_Book of Travels_ , translated by Robert Dankoff. The paper, the exact nature
of which will be discussed further in class, must demonstrate that you have
read the _entire book_ , thought about it carefully, and made a serious effort
to draw from it all the evidence that best supports your points. You will need
to quote from the book, refer to specific passages in it, and annotate your
paper in prescribed fashion to demonstrate this level of mastery.
Undergraduate papers are due in class on Wednesday, 6 March, at 1:30 p.m.

The weighting of grades in computation of the final average will be: midterm
30%, paper 30%, final exam 40%. For students preparing the graduate paper:
midterm 25%, paper 45%; final examination 30%.

READINGS

The following books are required and have been ordered through SBX:

Esposito. John, _Islam, the Straight Path_ , Oxford, 1991

Evliya, _The Intimate Life of an Ottoman Statesman: Melek Ahmed Pasha
(1588-1662) as Portrayed in Evliya Celebi's Book of Travels_ , trans. Robert
Dankoff, Albany, 1991

Inalcik, Halil, _The Middle East and the Balkans under the Ottoman Empire:
Essays on Economy and Society_ , Bloomington, 1993

Inalcik, Halil, _The Ottoman Empire: The Classical Age, 1300-1600_ , Phoenix
pb.

Peirce, Leslie, _The Imperial Harem: Women and Sovereignty in the Ottoman
Empire_ , Oxford pb

The following are required and are available in the form of a packet of
photocopies from Cop-Ez in the basement of Bricker Hall:

Braude, Benjamin, "Founding Myths of the _Millet_ System," in Benjamin Braude
and Bernard Lewis, _Christians and Jews in the Ottoman Empire: The Functioning
of a Plural System_ , New York, Holmes and Meier, 1982, vol. I, pages 69-88

Findley, Carter Vaughn, _Ottoman Civil Officialdom: A Social History_ ,
Princeton U.P., 1989, frontispiece + pp. 40-86

Gocek, Fatma Muge, _East Encounters West_ , New York, Oxford U.P., 1987, pages
7-81

Goffman. Daniel, "Ottoman Millets in the Early Seventeenth Century," _New
Perspectives on Turkey_ , no. I 1, 1994, pages 135-58 Inalcik, Halil, with
Donald Quataert, eds., _An Economic and Social History of the Ottoman Empire,
1300-1914_ , Cambridge University Press, 1994, pages 103-19 & 143-54

I have asked to have one copy of each of these items placed on reserve in the
Main Library Closed Reserve.

CLASS SCHEDULE

Readings marked with an asterisk (*) are found in the Cop-Ez packet of
photocopies (alternatively, in Closed Reserve, Main Library).

    
    
    
    
    I.
    
    
    
    
    	03 Jan W	Introduction to the Course	Esposito, pp. 1-114  
    
    
    
    	"   "  "	Language and Script. Ottoman Origins; Ottoman Identity
    
    
    
    
    	
    
    
    
    
    II.
    
    
    
    
    	08  "  M	Islam (discussion)	Esposito, pp. 1-114  
    
    
    
    	"   "  "	The Great Seljuk Empire and the Seljuks of Rum (or video)
    
    
    
    
    	10  "  W	Ghazi Beyliks	In., _Mid East_ , 309-41  
    
    
    
    	"   "  "	Outline of Ottoman History, 1300-1600	Inalcik, chs. 1-6
    
    
    
    
    	
    
    
    
    
    III.
    
    
    
    
    	15  "  M	MARTIN LUTHER KING DAY
    
    
    
    
    	17  "  W	Debate over Ottoman Origins
    
    
    
    
    	"   "  "	Mehmed II, the Conqueror: His Policy Toward
    
    
    
    
    	"   "  "	Istanbul and the Imperial Institutions; start Inalcik, chs. 7-12
    
    
    
    
    	
    
    
    
    
    IV.
    
    
    
    
    	22  "  M	Suleyman the Magnificent, The Empire at Its Height of Power,
    
    
    
    
    	"   "  "	The Last Great Age of the Mediterranean World, Video: "Sinan--I"; Peirce, 3-90
    
    
    
    
    
    	24  "  W	The State; Inalcik, chs. 7-12
    
    
    
    
    	"   "  "	Land Tenure; In., chs. 13; Mid East., 137-60
    
    
    
    
    	"   "  "	Inalcik & Quataert, pp. 103-19, 143-54
    
    
    
    
    	
    
    
    
    
    V.
    
    
    
    
    	29  "  M	Economic and Social Life	Inalcik, chs. 14-19
    
    
    
    
    	"   "  "	Religion, State, and Opposition	Mid East, 19-36
    
    
    
    
    	31  "  W	Imperial Harem, Imperial Household	Peirce, Intro. & chs. 1-5
    
    
    
    
    	"   "  "	Video: "Sinan--II"
    
    
    
    
    	
    
    
    
    
    VI.
    
    
    
    
    	05 Feb M	MIDTERM; Video: "Suleyman the Magnificent"
    
    
    
    
    	07  "  W	The "Sultanate of Women"; Peirce, chs. 3-5
    
    
    
    
    	"   "  "	Discussion of Evliya; Evliya, 3-20, 49-174; Video: "Sinan--III"
    
    
    
    
    	
    
    
    
    
    VII
    
    
    
    
    	12  "  M	Legitimation & Sovereignty; Peirce, chs. 6-7
    
    
    
    
    	"   "  "	State and Ideology under Suleyman; In., Mid. East, 70-94
    
    
    
    
    	14  "  W	Women and Power; Peirce. chs. 8-9 & concl.; Video: "Sinan--IV"
    
    
    
    
    	
    
    
    
    
    VIII.
    
    
    
    
    	19  "  M	Outline of Ottoman History 1600- 1800: Relations among Religious Communities
    
    
    
    
    	"   "  "	Braude, "Millet System"; *Goffman, "Millets"
    
    
    
    
    	21  "  W	Nomadism; the Peasant Economy [cf. 22 Jan.]; In., Middle East, 97-160
    
    
    
    
    	"   "  "	Discussion of Evliya Evliya, 175-285; Video: "Sinan--V"
    
    
    
    
    	
    
    
    
    
    IX.
    
    
    
    
    	26  "  M	Trade In., Middle East, 264-306
    
    
    
    
    	"   "  "	Central Elites: The Scribes *Findley, frontis. + 40-86
    
    
    
    
    	28  "  W	Decentralization and the Age of the A'yanl; Video: "Sinan--VI"
    
    
    
    
    	
    
    
    
    
    X.
    
    
    
    
    	04 Mar M	Late Eighteenth-Century Crises and Reactions
    
    
    
    
    	"   "  "	Yirmisekiz Celebi Mehmed's Embassy to France *Gocek, chs 1-4
    
    
    
    
    	06  "  W	Catch-up, Reports, Course Evaluation
    
    
    
    
    	"   "  "	ALL PAPERS DUE IN CLASS AT 1:30 P.M.
    
    
    
    
     
    
    
    
    
    	14 Mar R	FINAL EXAM (11:30 a.m.-1:18 p.m.)
    
    
    

