### History 583.03  
United States Diplomacy since 1945



_Lecturer_ : Dr. Peter Hahn

_Course Description_ : In this course we will study the major trends in United
States foreign policy since the end of World War II. The first half of the
course will focus on the origins and escalation of the Cold War in Europe and
Asia, the United States response to revolutionary nationalism in the Third
World, and American policy toward regional controversies such as the Arab-
Israeli conflict through 1967. The second half will concentrate on the Vietnam
War, Richard Nixon and detente, and the policies of Jimmy Carter, Ronald
Reagan, and George Bush toward the Soviet Union and the developing world.
Lectures and readings will introduce you to historical controversies and
conflicting interpretations, which you will be expected to analyze critically
in writing and discussions.



_Academic Objectives_ : From this course you should gain the following skills
and competencies:

  1. To develop the ability to assess and think critically about historical issues and how people interpret those issues; 
  2. To gain a basic factual knowledge of this historical period; 
  3. To develop some skills in analyzing historical data and reaching informed conclusions about those data. 



_Required Books_ : The following books are _required_ reading and should be
available at the bookstores.

  1. Walter LaFeber, _America, Russia, and the Cold War, 1945-1996_ , 8th ed. 
  2. Melvyn P. Leffler, _The Specter of Communism: The United States and the Origins of the Cold War, 1917-1953_
  3. Stephen Rabe, _Eisenhower and Latin America: The Foreign Policy of Anticommunism_. 
  4. James Olson and Randy Roberts, _Where the Dominoes Fell: America and Vietnam, 1945-1995_ , 2nd. ed. 
  5. Robert Schulzinger, _Henry Kissinger: Doctor of Diplomacy_. 
  6. Avi Shlaim, _War and Peace in the Middle East: A Critique of American Policy_. 

You should also purchase from Cop-EZ (in Bricker Hall) a course packet
containing essays by Arthur M. Schlesinger and Thomas G. Paterson.



_Meetings_ : Classes will meet every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday from 9:30
to 10:48 am. Attendance is mandatory at all class meetings. Attendance will be
taken five times, at random, during the quarter, and you will earn one point
for each time you are recorded present.



_Office Hours_ : My office is in Dulles Hall 271 (telephone 292-7200; e-mail
<hahn.29@osu.edu>). My office hours are MWF 11:00-12:00 and by appointment.



_Enrollment_ : All students must be officially enrolled in the course by the
end of the second full week of the quarter. No requests to add the course will
be approved by the department chair after that time. Enrolling officially and
on time is solely the responsibility of the student.



_Examinations_ : The midterm exam will be given during class on Monday,
February 10 and the final exam will be administered from 7:30 to 9:18 am on
Wednesday, March 19. Both exams will cover material from lectures and assigned
readings and will consist primarily of essay questions. The final exam will be
comprehensive. You will NOT be permitted to consult books, notebooks, or other
aids during the exams. Any student with an unexcused absence from an exam will
earn an E for that test. The time and place of the graduating seniors' exam
will be announced in class.



_Make-up exam policy_ : If for any family or medical reason you find it
absolutely necessary to miss an examination, you must contact me before the
exam and have my consent to your absence if you wish to take a make-up exam.
The date and time of any make-up exam will be announced in class.



_Essay_ : You must complete one out-of-class writing assignment based on the
book by Leffler. The assignment will be distributed during the first week of
class and will be due Friday, January 24. Early submissions are welcome.
Papers turned in late will be assessed penalties of a half letter grade per
day late; papers will not be accepted after January 31. To be fair to all
students, exceptions to these rules will not be granted.

Your essay will be graded on the basis of both content and style. It must be
typed, double-spaced, proofread, and corrected prior to submission. It should
number three to four pages. You must attribute the sources of quotations and
borrowed ideas by citing page numbers in the book. If one borrows the words or
ideas of others without acknowledgement, one is guilty of plagiarism. More
details on this assignment will be provided in class.



_Method of determining final grade_ : Your final grade will be determined as
follows:

    
    
                Attendance 5%          Essay 30%
                Midterm exam 25%       Final exam 40%  
    
    

In addition to completing these assignments, graduate students enrolled for
credit in this course must write an historiographical essay, on a topic to be
negotiated with me, worth 20% of their quarter grades and due February 28.



_Other expectations_ : Given the size of this class, your fellow students and
I depend on your cooperation in maintaining a classroom environment conducive
to learning. Late arrivals, early departures, and other disruptive behaviors
are strongly discouraged. On the other hand, you are encouraged to ask
questions and raise substantive issues at all times.

You are expected to maintain the highest standards of academic honesty and
integrity. Cheating, plagiarizing, or practicing other forms of dishonesty
will not be tolerated and, consonant with university regulations, may result
in failure of the course.



_Suggestions_ : If you do not understand a course requirement or course
material, please ask about it. I am here to help you and welcome opportunities
to answer your questions.

If you do not understand the grading of your examination, please seek
clarification at the earliest opportunity.

Consider the following suggestions to assist you in writing essay exams:

  1. Always relate exam points to time. If the exam has three sections of equal value, apportion your time equally. DO NOT spend longer on one of the sections than the percent of the grade justifies. 
  2. Before beginning to write, outline your essay to ensure orderliness as you write. Then compose an essay including an introduction, a body of several paragraphs, and a brief concluding paragraph. Following this advice rather than writing down thoughts as they come to mind will help you produce an organized, coherent essay. 
  3. Remember that the prime concern of history is to analyze change over time. When, why, and how the changes occurred and the significance of the changes to American history are central questions in this course. Bear this in mind as you take notes, read, and review. 
  4. I want you to succeed on the exams in general proportion to the time and effort you invest in studying. If this does not happen on the midterm, please talk to me at once. 



_Schedule of assignments_ : Lectures and assignments are _tentatively_
scheduled below. Each class will consist primarily of lecture, but ample time
will be reserved for questions and discussion. Please be prepared to make
thoughtful contributions to each class. Readings are assigned on a weekly
basis. You are expected to familiarize yourself with the topics of reading
assignments and complete them in conjunction with the appropriate lectures.

    
    
    Jan.   6    Introduction to the course
           8    Collapse of the Grand Alliance, 1945-1946
          10    Escalation of the Cold War in Europe, 1946-1953
                READINGS: LaFeber, 1-98; Leffler, vii-130
    
          13    The Cold War in Asia, 1945-50
          15    Diplomacy of the Korean War
          17    Interpretations of the Cold War
    	      READINGS: LaFeber, 99-144
    
          20    HOLIDAY
          22    Eisenhower and Europe
          24    ESSAYS DUE
                Eisenhower and Asia
                READINGS: LaFeber, 145-81, 192-208
    
          27    Truman and the Middle East 
          29    Eisenhower and the Middle East
          31    Truman, Eisenhower and Latin America
                READINGS: LaFeber, 181-91, 208-19; Rabe 1-178
    
    Feb.   3	Kennedy, Johnson, and the Cold War 
    	 5	Kennedy, Johnson, and Latin America
    	 7	Kennedy, Johnson, and the Middle East & Africa
    		READINGS: LaFeber, 220-51; Schlesinger and Paterson essays 
    
    	10	MIDTERM
    	12	Vietnam I
    	14	Vietnam II
    		READINGS:  LaFeber, 252-82; Olson & Roberts, vii-209
    
    	17	Vietnam III
    	19	Nixon, Kissinger, and the origins of detente
    	21	Nixon, Kissinger, and the limits of detente
    		READINGS: Olson & Roberts, 209-68; Schulzinger, ix-242
    
    
    	24	Nixon, Kissinger, and the Third World
    	26	Jimmy Carter and the Soviets
    	28	Jimmy Carter and the Third World
    		READINGS: LaFeber, 283-99
    
    Mar.   3	Jimmy Carter and the Ayatollah Khomeini
    	 5	Reagan, Bush, and the deepening Cold War 
    	 7	Reagan, Bush, and the end of the Cold War 
    		READINGS: LaFeber, 299-326
    
    	10	Reagan, Bush, and the Third World
    	12	Reagan, Bush, and the Middle East 
    		READINGS: LaFeber, 327-71; Shlaim, 1-142
    	14	REVIEW
    
    
    
    March 19 (Wednesday)   FINAL EXAM    7:30-9:18 am
    
    

