### History 540.01  
Islamic Society, 600-1258

Professor Jane Hathaway

Winter 1997  
M,W 9:30-11:18  
Journalism 375



**Description:** This is an introduction to the major institutions that
evolved under the aegis of what we might call Islamic civilization from the
advent of Islam around 610 C.E. through the Mongol conquest of Baghdad in
1258. The principal geographical areas that we will cover are the Middle East,
North Africa, and Spain. Since  "Islam" in this context encompasses not simply
a religion but an entire cultural complex, we shall examine not only religious
but also political, economic, and social institutions. No prior knowledge of
Islam or of the Middle East is assumed; students possessing prior knowledge
are, however, welcomed.

**Structure of the course:** I will typically lecture on Mondays and during
the first half of the Wednesday class. The second half of the Wednesday class
will be devoted to discussion, review, or a video. For discussions, the class
will divide into several groups to address a question that I will pose the
preceding Monday. You should review your texts with this question in mind and
prepare to discuss the question, bringing in relevant examples from the texts.
(You may, of course, challenge the question or raise questions or problems of
your own.) Each group will talk amongst themselves for roughly 20 minutes;
afterwards, the groups will come together to share their conclusions. The
purpose of these discussions is to encourage students to synthesize material
from several different sources in response to a specific question and to
evaluate historical sources critically. In some cases, slides and tapes will
be used to reinforce material presented in readings and lectures.

**Written assignments:**

  1. A brief **map exercise** , to be distributed **Wednesday, January 8**. The exercise will be due in class **Wednesday, January 15**. 
  2. A midterm examination**, to be held during the first half of class **Monday, February 10**. This exam will consist of several identifications and one essay question; it will cover material presented during the first half of the course. 
  3. A **short paper** of about 6 pages, due **Wednesday, March 12**. This paper will present the historical context and implications of one or more of the readings from primary sources. **Graduate students** enrolled in the course are not required to write the short paper but must prepare a **research paper** of 15-20 pages. This paper may deal with any topic relating to the development of Islamic institutions before 1258. Bibliographical essays are encouraged. If you choose not to write a bibliographical essay, your paper must make use of primary sources, whether those read in connection with the course or others. A proposed paper topic and tentative bibliography must be submitted no later than **Wednesday, February 19**. The completed paper will be due on **Wednesday, March 12**. A more detailed description of this assignment will be given toward the beginning of February. 
  4. A **final examination** , to be held **Wednesday, March 19, at 7:30 a.m.** (yes, a.m.). This exam will consist of identifications and two essay questions. It will stress material covered during the second half of the course; however, it will refer to earlier material, as well. 
**Attendance and late work:** All assignments are due **in class** on the
dates specified above. Late work will be downgraded by one letter grade for
each day it is late. Work that is four or more days late will not be accepted.
I do not give incompletes. If you are unable to complete the quarter's work on
schedule, be prepared to turn in what you have accomplished or accept an  "E".
Exceptions to this policy will be made only in dire circumstances (e.g.,
serious illness, death in the family), which **must** be documented.

**Grading:**

    
    
                                        _Undergraduates_       _Graduates_attendance and participation              15%                15%map exercise                               5%                 5%midterm                                   25%                20%paper                                     25%                40%  final                                     30%                20%

**Readings:** The following books are required for the course and are
available at SBX, Long's, and the University Bookstore:

> Ira M. Lapidus, _A History of Islamic Societies_ (Cambridge, 1988)  
>  Bernard Lewis, ed. and trans., _Islam from the Prophet Muhammad to the
Capture of Constantinople_ (New York, 1974, pb 1987), Vol. I: _Politics and
War_ , Vol. II: _Religion and Society_  
>  In addition, a **coursepack** of required readings is available at **Cop-
EZ** in the Ohio Union.

The following book is recommended for the course and is available at all three
bookstores:

> Bertold Spuler, _The Age of the Caliphs_ , vol. I of _The Muslim World_ ,
paperback reissue (Princeton, 1995)

Copies of the books have been placed on closed reserve in the Main Library, as
well.

**Suggestions for reading:** Always read critically. Read the author's
introduction, if available, to see what his stated approach is. As you
continue, ask yourself whether the author follows through with this approach.
Check the bibliography and acknowledgements to see what sources the author
uses and to whom he is beholden. If you read two or more texts on a given
topic, compare the authors' handling of the material. This course stresses
awareness of primary sources. How do different secondary sources treat their
primary material?

**Schedule of Activities and Readings**

    
    
    **Week 1:**  Introduction; The pre-Islamic setting   Marshall G.S. Hodgson, _The Venture of Islam_ (Chicago, 1974), Vol. I:      _The Classical Age of Islam_ , 3-22, 137-145   Lapidus, 3-10   Look through Lapidus' and Lewis' books to see what maps, chronologies,      glossaries, etc., are available.  Familiarize (or re-familiarize) yourself      with the geography of the Middle East.Jan. 6    Goals of the course          Nomenclature, orthography, geography          Visit to the Middle East and Judaic reading room, Main Library Room 300 Jan. 8    The Byzantine and Sasanian empires          Video:  "The Lost City of cUbar"         **Map exercise handed outWeek 2:**   Arabia at the advent of Islam   Lapidus, 11-36   Ignaz Goldziher, _Muslim Studies_ , ed. S.M. Stern, trans. C.R. Barber      and S.M. Stern (Albany, 1967, 1977), I: 45-70   A.J. Arberry, ed. and trans., _The Seven Odes:  The First Chapter in_       _Arabic Literature_ (London and New York, 1957), 13-17, 21-24, 31-39, 61-66  Jan. 13   Pre-Islamic Arabia          Muhammad's milieu Jan. 15   From the revelation of the Qur )~n to the hijra          Conflict with and conquest of Mecca          **Map exercise dueWeek 3:**   Development of the tenets of Islam   Lapidus, 28, 34-38   Lewis, **II** : Introduction, Nos. 1, 2, 8              Jan. 20   **Martin Luther King Day:  no class**          Jan. 22   The pillars of Islam            Video:   "The Guests of God"**Week 4:**   After Muhammad:  Caliphate, schism, empire   Lapidus, 37-67   Bernard Lewis, _The Political Language of Islam_ (Chicago, 1988), 43-70   Lewis, **I** : Intro. to Section 1, Nos. 1-5, 39-40, 42-44, 62-65;          **II** : Nos. 15, 17, 18Jan. 27   The beginning of the caliphate; development of the religion under the early caliphs          The first civil war; origins of Shicism and KharijismJan. 29   Beginnings of empire; the Umayyads and Syrian dominance          Discussion**Week 5:**   The rise of the  cAbbasids and the evolution of high Islamic civilization   Lapidus, pp. 67-80, 98-109, 120-125, 162-167, 192-194    Lewis, **I** : Nos. 6-9, 47-50;          **II** : Nos. 9-11, 13; Intro. to Section 2; Nos. 16, 19-23, 27Feb. 3    The cAbbasid revolution; the founding of Baghdad          Development of Islamic law and theologyFeb. 5    The bureaucracy          Review**Week 6:**   The weakening of the  cAbbasid caliphate and the rise of local autonomies   Lapidus, 126-152, 345-354, 365-389   David Ayalon, "The Muslim City and the Mamluk Military Aristocracy,"      in Ayalon, _Studies on the Mamluks of Egypt_ (London, 1977), 312-319   Lewis, **I** : Nos. 11, 12, 14, 16-21, 31-33, 51;          **II** : Nos. 69, 88Feb. 10   **Midterm**          Samanids, Buyids, Ghaznavids, and SeljuksFeb. 12   Rival caliphates:  Baghdad, Cairo, C \rdoba           The _maml ak_ institution          **Week 7:**   Rebellion, heresy, and deviations from orthodoxy   Lapidus:  Review 59-60, 78-79.  Read 109-119, 163-164, 168-174, 192-224.   selections from the _Nahj al-Bal ~gha_ (traditions of cAli) - handout   Lewis, **I** : Nos. 13-14; **II** : Nos. 5, 6, 24-26    A.J. Arberry, ed. and trans., _Muslim Saints and Mystics:  Episodes from the_      _Tadhkir ~t al-Awliy~) of Farid al-Din Attar_ (London, 1966), 39-51, 199-213, 264-271Feb. 17   The articulation of Shicism and the appearance of radical movements:  Carmatians, Nizaris          _Falsafa_ vs. _kalam_Feb. 19   Sufism          Video:   "Saints and Spirits;" discussion          **Graduate student paper proposals dueWeek 8:**   Economic and administrative developments     Lapidus, 71-76, 128-130, 148-152   Lewis, **II** : Nos. 3, 4, 38-42, 46, 47, 49-51, 74-83   S.D. Goitein, _Letters of Medieval Jewish Traders_ (Princeton, 1973), Nos. 2, 10Feb. 24   Central and provincial administration          The urban marketplace; commerceFeb. 26  **** Status of religious minorities          Discussion**Week 9:**   The Islamic city/the imperial city   Lapidus, 81-97, 152-161, 172-180   S.M. Stern,  "The Constitution of the Islamic City," in A.H. Hourani      and S.M. Stern, eds., _The Islamic City:  A Colloquium_ (Oxford, 1970), 25-50   Lewis, **I** : Nos. 45, 46; **II** : Nos. 27 (review), 28, 45, 57, 65-68   Hilal al-Sabi, _Rus am d~r al-khil~fa_, ed. and trans. Elie A. Salem      (Beirut, 1977), 13-33, 73-74Mar. 3    The Islamic City          Religious trends in an urban contextMar. 5    Court ceremonial          Discussion              **Week 10:**  Women and outsiders   Lapidus, 127-128, 148, 277-280    Leila Ahmed, _Women and Gender in Islam_ (New Haven, 1992), 64-101 handout   Lewis, **I** : Nos. 22-26; **II** :  Nos. 62 (pp. 197-198), 87, 89, 91   Recommended for general review:  Lapidus, 225-237Mar. 10   The status of women and non-military slaves           Video:  "The Arabs:  A Living History - Family Ties"Mar. 12   The Mongols and the end of the caliphate          Review and conclusion           **Papers due**          **Final exam Wednesday, March 19, 7:30 a.m., in Journalism 375.**           

