### History 330.02  
Modern Western Jewish Civilization



With tremendous advances in transportation and communication, it has become
cliche to refer to the world as a "global village." What if the world were a
village of one thousand people? What would it look like, from the perspective
of religion? Not surprisingly the largest number would be Christian, with 183
Roman Catholics, 84 Protestants, and 33 Eastern Orthodox; and for the various
non-Christians: 175 Moslems, 128 Hindus, 55 Buddhists, 47 Animists, and 210
without any religion or atheist. (The Utne Reader, July/August 1990, p. 144)

In this scale model Jews do not merit the briefest mention. Why, then, do Jews
and "Jewish issues" loom so large throughout history? Part of any response to
this question lies in the Jews' conception of their own role in history and
their perception by the non-Jewish world. At the very least, one can say that
the Jews' influence in the world has been far out of proportion to their
number. Conversely, Gentile societies' attention to the "Jewish Problem" has
been far out of proportion to any real "problems" that the Jews might have
posed. Jews have been enigmatic to the non-Jewish majority cultures to the
point that their mere existence has elicited the most brutal manifestations of
human fear and hatred.

This course explores the experience of the Jews from the fifteenth century up
through the present. Emphasis will be placed on the thought and lives of Jews
within the general framework of European and American history. Among the
topics to be considered are: the Jewish textual tradition; the Expulsion from
Spain; Shabbatai Zvi; Polish Jewry; Hasidism; the Enlightenment; the Pale of
Settlement; Emancipation; religious and political adjustments; changing roles
of women; racism and anti-Semitism; the rise of socialism, Jewish socialist-
nationalism, and Zionism; immigration; World War I; the rise of Nazism; the
Holocaust; American Jewries; the historical memory of the Holocaust; the State
of Israel and the "forgotten" Sephardic Jews; and questions of identity. The
objectives of the course are: to provide a narrative of the principle events
and movements in modern Jewish history, to convey a sense of "everyday" Jewish
life, to promote clear and distinct exposition, and to have students think
more analytically, critically, and historically about the Jewish people.

Students will be evaluated on the basis of attendance (in class and at special
lectures) and participation in class discussions; two tests during class
periods; a final examination; and one paper of 12-14 pages. Papers and exams
will be based on lectures and required readings. There is no "research paper"
for the course. It is strongly suggested that students begin reading the
novels and memoirs for the course as soon as possible.

An important note: this course is not, and in no way intends to be a "how-to"
course of Jewish practice. For example, there will be no extensive treatment
of "how to keep kosher," "how to pray properly," or "how to observe the
holidays." Rather, the emphasis is on the historical, intellectual, political,
and social development of the Jews, in the framework of academic scholarship.

Grade breakdown: first test: 10% second test: 20% paper: 30% final exam: 30%
attendance and participation: 10%

All students must be officially enrolled in the course by the end of the
second full week of the quarter. No requests to add the course will be
approved by the Departmental chair after that time. Enrolling officially and
on time is solely the responsibility of each student.

Plagiarism, which will be defined here as the unattributed use of a source, or
trying to pass off someone else's work as one's own, will not be tolerated.
All quotations and paraphrases must be cited with footnotes or endnotes.
Failure to do so is plagiarism, a serious infraction of university rules. If
suspected, the alleged offenders will be prosecuted to the extent of
university guidelines.

Required readings (available at SBX)

  * Paul Mendes-Flohr and Jehuda Reinharz, eds., _The Jew in the Modern World_
  * I.J. Singer, _The Brothers Ashkenazi_
  * Donald L. Niewyk, ed., _The Holocaust_
  * Lion Feuchtwanger, _The Oppermanns_
  * Ruth Rosen and Sue Davidson, eds., _The Maimie Papers_
  * Zvi Gitelman, T _he Quest for Utopia: Jewish Political Ideas and Institutions Through the Ages_
  * Gluckel, _Gluckel of Hameln_
  * text on reserve: Robert Seltzer, _Jewish People, Jewish Thought_ 

Tentative schedule:

  * Tuesday, January 3, 1995: Introductions reading: Seltzer, pp. 1-111, 243-314, Gluckel, pp. 1-65; Singer, pp. 3-29; Gitelman, pp. ix-66; Mendes-Flohr, pp. 214-218. 
  * Wednesday, January 4, 1995: Foundations: the Hebrew Scriptures: who wrote the Bible? 
  * Thursday, January 5, 1995: Foundations: Tanakh, Mishnah 
  * Friday, January 6, 1995: Foundations: Talmud, Midrash, Responsa, Codes reading: Seltzer, pp. 323-418, 456-57, 467-74, 493-97, 502-579, 613,643, 658-61, 676, 678, 797-98; Gluckel, pp. 66-217; Singer, pp. 30-74; Gitelman, pp. 67-79. 
  * Monday, January 9, 1995: Jews in the world of Christendom 
  * Tuesday, January 10, 1995: Debate over foundations of anti-Semitism 
  * Wednesday, January 11, 1995: Spanish Jewry, part I 
  * Thursday, January 12, 1995: Spanish Jewry, part II; mystical background of Shabbtai Zvi. 
  * Friday, January 13, 1995: Shabbatai Zvi, the mystical messiah and his successors reading: Gluckel, pp. 217-277; Seltzer, pp. 580-625; Singer, pp. 75-133; Mendes-Flohr, pp. 1-213; 218-230. 
  * Monday, January 16, 1995: NO CLASS: MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR. DAY OBSERVED 
  * Tuesday, January 17, 1995: Moses Mendelssohn 
  * Wednesday, January 18, 1995: Judaism adjusted: the reform movement 
  * Thursday, January 19, 1995: Heinrich Heine and German Jewry 
  * Friday, January 20, 1995: in-class exam; short-answers reading: Seltzer, pp. 626-635, 642-647; Feuchtwanger, pp.1-126; Singer, pp. 134-228; Mendes-Flohr, pp. 300-353. 
  * Monday, January 23, 1995: Polish Jewry and the Hasidic movement 
  * Tuesday, January 24, 1995: the Yeshiva movement 
  * Wednesday, January 25, 1995: Life and labor in the Pale of Settlement ***Thursday, January 26, 1995: guest lecture: Professor Robert Liberles, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev: "Salo Baron and the Re-writing of Jewish History," time and location to be announced 
  * Friday, January 27, 1995: Life and labor in the Pale of Settlement reading: Seltzer, pp. 356-361, 504,517, 643, 645, 652-661; 711-715; Singer, pp. 229-309; Rosen, pp. xi-83; Feuchtwanger, pp. 127-222; Mendes-Flohr, pp. 250-299; 354-417. 
  * Monday, January 30, 1995: Volkish anti-Semitism, part I 
  * Tuesday, January 31, 1995: French Jews, Turkish Jews: encounters with Sepharidm 
  * Wednesday, February 1, 1995: Pogroms and beginnings of emigration 
  * Thursday, February 2, 1995: Immigrants in the New World, part I 
  * Friday, February 3, 1995: Immigrants in the New World, part II reading: Seltzer, pp. 653-655; 630-632, 638-641; Singer, pp. 313-427; Rosen, pp. 83-185; Gitelman, pp. 81-117; Feuchtwanger, pp. 222-315; Mendes-Flohr, pp. 418-481. 
  * Monday, February 6, 1995: Yiddish culture in America 
  * Tuesday, February 7, 1995: Jews in the Russian Revolution and early Bolshevik Rule 
  * Wednesday, February 8, 1995: Viennese Anti-Semites; Freud, Jews, and the Psychoanalytic Movement 
  * Thursday, February 9, 1995: COMBINED CLASS WITH MIDDLE EAST STUDIES: LECTURE ON THE ORIGINS OF THE ZIONIST MOVEMENT, 10:30 AM, location to be announced 
  * Friday, February 10, 1995: second in-class exam; short-answers and essays reading: Seltzer, pp. 634, 641-655, 684-709; Rosen, pp. 186-279; Feuchtwanger, pp. 315-406; Mendes-Flohr, pp. 233-249. 
  * Monday, February 13, 1995: COMBINED CLASS WITH MIDDLE EAST STUDIES: LECTURE ON THE ZIONIST MOVEMENT TO 1948, 10:30 AM, location to be announced 
  * Tuesday, February 14: Jews in World War I 
  * Wednesday, February 15: Eastern Europe between the Wars, part I 
  * Thursday, February 16: Eastern Europe between the Wars, part II 
  * Friday, February 17: The Mandate for Palestine: a doomed balancing act reading: Seltzer, pp. 655-665; Niewyk, pp. 9-128; Rosen, pp. 280-426; Mendes- Flohr, pp. 482-523. 
  * Monday, February 20, 1995: Reevaluating Weimar Jewish culture and the last spark of German Jewry, 1933-1938 
  * Tuesday, February 21, 1995: the Second World War and the Jews 
  * Wednesday, February 22, 1995: The Holocaust 
  * Thursday, February 23, 1995: the decision for the "Final Solution"
  * Friday, February 24, 1995: Einsatzgruppen and "Ordinary Men" Paper due in class, 12-14 pages (combined), typed, double-spaced, and proof-read: answer both parts, a and b. (Further instructions will be given in class). a) Construct an imaginary dialogue between Gluckel and Maimie. b) Construct an imaginary dialogue between one character from The Oppermanns and one character from The Brothers Ashkenazi. reading: Seltzer, pp. 665-671; Niewyk, pp. 129-263 
  * Monday, February 27, 1995: The Holocaust: selections from "Shoah"
  * Tuesday, February 28, 1995: The Holocaust: selections from "Shoah"
  * Wednesday, March 1: Desperate bargaining: Jews at the end of the War 
  * Thursday, March 2, 1995: Eastern Europe immediately after the War: anti-Semitism without Jews 
  * Friday, March 3, 1995: the end of the Mandate and Israel's "War for Independence;" facing Sephardic Jewry reading: Seltzer, pp. 671-683, 709-766; Gitelman, pp. 119-153. 
  * Monday, March 6, 1995: Israel's Wars: 1956, 1967, 1973 
  * Tuesday, March 7, 1995: Post-war Europe and the Jews 
  * Wednesday, March 8, 1995: Modern Israel: the religious right-wing 
  * Thursday, March 9, 1995: American Jews and the impact of fundamentalisms 
  * Friday, March 10, 1995 American Jewry: demise or transformation? 
  * final exam: Wednesday, March 15, 11:30 AM 

