 [Course listing ](../../index.htm)| [Ant 399 Home](index.html) | Syllabus |
[Assignments](399%20MENA%20Assignments.html) |
[Readings](readings399MidEast/399%20MENA%20Readingsindex.html) |
[Assessment](399%20MENA%20Assessment.html)

ANT 39901 Cultural Areas of the World: The Middle East

CRN

Dr. Dorothy D. Wills

Cal Poly University Pomona



**COURSE SYLLABUS**



Required Texts:



_Guests of the Sheik_ , _An Ethnography of an Iraqi Village_ , Elizabeth
Warnock Fernea. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1965.

_Understanding Arabs_ , _A Guide for Westerners_ (rev. ed.), Margaret K.
(Omar) Nydell. Yarmouth, ME: Intercultural Press, 1996.

_The Middle East_ (6th ed.), William Spencer, ed. Guilford, CT: Dushkin, 1996.



Recommended:



_The Koran_ ( _Al Qur ian_), trans. Dawood (6th ed.), 1990.



All of the above are available at the campus bookstore. I will ask the library
to place copies on reserve. Many other versions of the Koran exist. You will
be doing research on your own, as well, requiring further reading outside
class, so you may want to familiarize yourself with our libraryis holdings on
this subject and with the collections in your local libraries. Additional
readings will be provided in class in the form of handouts.



**Requirements**



You are to complete two brief reports (about five pages in length per report)
on (1) a country or ethnic group, and (2) an issue or topic of your choice
relevant to the course subject matter. Suitable choices will be discussed in
class or in individual meetings with the instructor. There will also be a mid-
term and a final exam. I will consider administering these on a take-home
basis, if there is sufficient demand. You are expected to attend class and
participate in class discussions, including providing specialized information
drawn from your growing expertise in the report areas you have chosen.



Country report 20%

Topic report 20%

Mid-term exam 20%

Final exam 30%

Attendance/participation _10%_

Grade 100%

If you have not taken Introduction to Cultural Anthropology or any other
anthropology courses, you may need to consult outside texts in this field for
unfamiliar terminology or

concepts. However, everyone should be able to do well in this course!

(2) Middle East



**Outline of Lectures and Reading Assignments**



A. _Introduction and Basic History and Geography of the Region._



Jan. 7 Countries and general geography of the Middle East and North Africa
(MENA).

American stereotypes and false images of Arabs, Muslims, Jews, and the region.

Problems in studying this area and in cultural area studies in general.

READ: _Guests_ : Introduction, begin Part I.

_Middle East_ : Maps, Art. 1.

_Arabs_ : Introduction, Appendix B.



Jan. 9 A little bit of recent history and current events. Important basic
concepts in an-

thropological area studies. Broad cultural parameters. Who lives here today?

Where did they come from?

READ: _Guests_ : Chs. 1 and 2.

_Middle East_ : Arts. 15 and 23.

_Arabs_ : Ch. 1.



Jan. 14 The ancient MENA; archaeology and culture history as far as we know. A
bit

about Egypt, Sumer, Akkad, and other ancient civilizations. Origin and migra-

tion of the Afro-Asiatic and Indo-European speaking peoples of the region.

READ: _Guests_ : Ch. 3.

_Middle East_ : Art 2.



Jan. 16 The desert environment and its impact on human behavior. Some
information

on population and demographics. Natural resources and their distribtion.

Controversy: environmental determinism.

READ: _Guests_ : Chs. 4 and 5.

_Middle East_ : Arts. 13 and 20. Consult Country Reports.

_Arabs_ : Ch. 2.



B. _Culture and Communication_.



Jan. 21 Basic customs (cultural practices), dress and diet, attitudes to space
and time.

The problem of identity as opposed to behavior. Discussion of Arab culture

and personality.

READ: _Guests_ : Ch. 6.

_Middle East_ : "Cradle of Islam."

_Arabs_ : Appendix A.



Jan. 23 Language and communicative behavior. Bilingualism and diglossia.
Health

and education: political issues and aspects.

READ: _Guests_ : Chs. 7 and 8.

(3) Middle East



_Middle East_ : Arts. 5 and 17.

_Arabs_ : Ch. 3.



C. _Socioeconomic Systems and Political Organization_.



Jan. 28 Pastoralism, horticulture and other modes of production. Division of
labor.

Patterns of movement and settlement. Case study: the Bedouin pastoral nomads

of Arabia.

READ: _Guests_ : Chs. 9 and 10.

_Middle East_ : Art. 6.



Jan. 30 Political organization in relation to concepts of power, authority,
and hierarchy.

The rule of age and maleness. Legal and juridical systems: the backbone of

Islam and Judaism.

READ: _Guests_ : Chs. 11 and 12.

_Middle East_ : Arts. 7 and 21.

_Arabs_ : Ch. 4.



Feb. 4 Social structure and organization. "Tribes", clans, and other factional
groups. The

fundamental units of MENA society. Controversy: patrilineality and male

dominance: must they be linked?

READ: _Guests_ : Chs. 13 and 14.

_Middle East_ : Art. 10.



Feb. 6 **Mid-term exam.**

READ: _Guests_ : Chs. 15 and 16.

_Middle East_ : "Theater of Conflict."

_Arabs_ : Ch. 5.



D. _Kinship, Marriage, and the Family_.



Feb. 11 Arranged marriage, polygyny, and other marital customs. The life
cycle. Initia-

tion into adulthood, female circumcision, and other ritals.

READ: _Guests_ : Chs. 17 and 18.

_Middle East_ : Art. 11.



Feb. 13 The family, child-rearing practices, and early education. Gender
differential

socialization. Case study: the Israeli kibbutz. Spirois theory of
socialization

for national character.

READ: _Guests_ : Chs. 19 and 20.

_Middle East_ : Art. 12.

_Arabs_ : Ch. 6.



(4) Middle East



Feb. 18 Women in Islamic society. The issues of veiling and purdah. The age
factor.

Revolution and reaction in the same communities in MENA.

READ: _Guests_ : Chs. 21 and 22.

_Middle East_ : Art. 16.



Feb. 20 Sexual institutions and behavior. Prostitution. Homosexuality and
"third

genders"; e.g., the "xanith" of Oman.

READ: _Guests_ : Ch. 23.

_Middle East_ : Art. 9.

_Arabs_ : Ch. 7.



E. _Religion and Philosophy_.



Feb. 25 World view and belief systems. Codes of personal and inter-personal
conduct.

The spirit world, deities, saints, prophets, diviners, and others.
Eschatology.

READ: _Guests_ : Ch. 24.

_Middle East_ : Arts. 4 and 3.



Feb. 27 A brief history of Islam. The prophet Mohammadis life. The impact of
Islam on

indigenous cultures in Africa and Asia.

READ: _Guests_ : Ch. 25.

_Middle East_ : Art. 19.

_Arabs_ : Ch. 8.

_Koran_ : Chapters to be assigned in class.



Mar. 4 The five pillars of Islam. Basic concepts of honor, grace, submission,
charity,

and devotion. The role of women and men. Duties of a good Muslim.

Festivals and rituals.

READ: _Guests_ : Ch. 26.

_Middle East_ : Art. 22.

_Koran_ : To be assigned.



Mar. 6 Discussion of readings from the Koran. Muslim sects: Sunnis, Shiiites,
Sufis,

maraboutism, brotherhoods, and cults. Controversy: domination or deference.

The people of the book.

READ: _Guests_ : Post Script.

_Middle East_ : Arts. 14 and 18.

_Arabs_ : Ch. 9.



F. _Colonialism and Social Change in the Modern Context_.



Mar. 11 The colonial impact. Modernization, westernization, and urbanization.
Social

problems and political conflict in the MENA. Problems in Islamic society.

(5) Middle East



The emerging states. International relations. The diaspora.

READ: _Middle East_ : Art. 8. Study Country Reports.



Mar. 13 Political economy. Socialist movements in recent times. The phenomenon
of

the charismatic dictator. Specific cases of MENA leadership: Qaddafi,

Bourguiba, Sadat, Saddam, Rabin....

READ: _Middle East_ : "Palestine: Becoming a State." Study Country Reports.

_Arabs_ : Ch. 10 and Conclusion.



Mar. 18 **Final Exam** 1:40 - 3:40



**Office and Hours** : Building 5:147, Ext. 3582.

Tues. 2 - 3, Wed. 11 - 12, Thurs. 2 - 3, or by appointment.

Most of the time I can be found at the International Center, Bldg. 1:104, Ext.
3336. My secretary there is Ms. Kinder, and her extension is 3337. The
Department of Geography and Anthropology is located in Bldg. 5:152, Ext. 3569
or 3570.



 [Course listing ](../../index.htm)| [Ant 399 Home](index.html) | Syllabus |
[Assignments](399%20MENA%20Assignments.html) |
[Readings](readings399MidEast/399%20MENA%20Readingsindex.html) |
[Assessment](399%20MENA%20Assessment.html)



