**HISTORY 489S - THE PALESTINE MANDATE, 1920 - 1948  
SPRING 2000  
975 WOODRUFF LIBRARY  
THURSDAYS, 4:30 - 6:30PM**

**Dr. Kenneth W. Stein  
121 Bowden Hall  
404-727-4472  
kstein@emory.edu **



**CONTENT:**

This junior/senior colloquium will review the thirty-year history prior to the
creation of Israel in 1948. Using primary and secondary sources, the seminar
will focus on the variety of social, economic, and political issues which
influenced the Arab-Jewish struggle in Palestine. Students will concentrate on
understanding the methods and policies of the Arab, British, and Zionist
communities, and how these three political groups interacted. Students will
use a variety of sources, including primary archival material, relevant
unpublished dissertations, period newspapers, memoirs, secondary sources,
biographies, and novels of the era.

**TEXTS:**

Hurewitz, J.C., _The Struggle for Palestine_ , (New York: Schoken Books,
1950).  
(Students will purchase this book from the professor at the beginning of the
semester.)

Marlowe, John, _The Seat of Pilate_ , (London: Cresset, 1961).  
( **OPTIONAL** \- This is another broad overview of the Palestine Mandate
period. It is somewhat similar in style and content to _Crossroads to
Israel_.)

Silberstein, Laurence J. (ed.), _New Perspectives on Israeli History: The
Early Years of the State_ , (New York: New York University Press, 1991), ISBN
0 8147 7929 8.  
(To be purchased at the bookstore.)

Sykes, Christopher, _Crossroads to Israel_ , (Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana
University Press, 1973).  
(Students will purchase this book from the professor at the beginning of the
semester.)

Students, please note that the Hurewitz and Sykes books are out of print.
During the last three months, I purchased used copies of these books for you
over the Internet. The cost for both is $55. Please make check payable to the
_Middle East Research Program_.

A core of required articles and books are on reserve at Woodruff; some may be
obtained online via <emory.edu>.

**GENERAL PARTICULARS:**

Each student will write two papers and be responsible for two oral
presentations. Students may attempt to satisfy all college and history writing
requirements. The ten-page short paper (30%) will be written about a
personality or institution of the period. Secondary source materials will be
used. For the research paper (50%), which will be 20-30 pages (40 pages for
graduate students), everyone is expected to use primary source materials
including the Colonial Office 733 Series in the Woodruff Library Microfilm
area. Finally, each student will make two oral presentations (10% each).

**GENERAL FORMAT RULES ABOUT BOTH PAPERS:**

Students are expected to submit a bibliography and use endnotes. Students may
not use and abbreviated or scientific notation format for citations in either
of the submitted papers. For an indication on how to organize your
bibliography or endnotes, use for guidance my book, _The Land Question in
Palestine, 1917-1939_. This is a modified form presented in the _Chicago
Manual of Style_. The manual is a standard for professional/scholarly writing.
All papers must be typed and double-spaced, with no more than 250 words per
page.

**SHORT PAPER: 30%**

The short paper will be written about a personality of the period. The paper
should be no longer than 10 pages in length, including endnotes. For this
short paper, each student should read a memoir and/or biography and short
articles of one actor who influenced the history of Zionism, the Arab
community in Palestine, or the evolution of the Palestine Mandate. You are
expected to use secondary source materials, such as scholarly articles from
journals and periodicals, to supplement the biographies and/or memoirs you
read. **These short papers are due in class on Thursday, March 2, 2000.**

**RESEARCH PAPER: 50%**

The research paper will be a topic of the student's choosing in consultation
with the professor. For undergraduates, the paper must be no less than 20
pages, but no more than 30 pages, including endnotes and bibliography; length
for graduate student research papers will be between 30 and 40 pages total.
Each student will be expected to use primary source research
material,including the Colonial Office 733 Series which is on microfilm in
Woodruff Library. You are also expected to use secondary source materials,
such as scholarly articles from journals, periodicals, and contemporaneous
newspapers to supplement the primary source material which you use. A list of
possible research paper topics appears at the end of the syllabus. **The
research paper will be due the last day of class at 6pm on Thursday, April 27,
2000.**

**ORAL PRESENTATIONS: 20%**

There will be two **OR** three oral presentations, each not to exceed 15
minutes in length. The date of the presentation will vary according to
topic/article assigned. The presentations will be made in the context of the
topics in the syllabus. One presentation will be a summary of your research
paper and its findings. For the presentation of your research paper summary,
you must prepare a one-page synopsis of your findings to be distributed to
your peers the day of the presentation.

**REQUIRED READINGS:**

Articles are held on reserve under this course number at the Woodruff Library
or may be found on the Internet via <emory.edu>.

**JANUARY 20:  
INTRODUCTION TO THE COURSE, DISTRIBUTION OF SYLLABUS AND SELECTION OF TOPICS;
"THE LATE OTTOMAN PERIOD AND WWI: THE SOCIAL, ECONOMIC, AND POLITICAL LEGACY
OF OTTOMAN PALESTINE" (STEIN LECTURE)**

Avineri, Shlomo, "Zionism as a National Liberation Movement," _Jerusalem
Quarterly_ , Vol. 10, Winter 1979, pp. 133-144.

Kolatt, Israel, "The Zionist Movement and the Arabs," _Studies in Zionism_ ,
No. 3, April 1982, pp. 129-157.

**JANUARY 27:  
WWI AND ITS AFTERMATH: ZIONISM AND ARAB NATIONALISM AFTER WWI; PROMISES,
DIPLOMACY, AND THE MANDATE; WHY THE BRITISH ISSUED THE BALFOUR DECLARATION;
ZIONISM, NON-ZIONISM, AND ANTI-ZIONISM-- AMERICA, EUROPE, AND PALESTINE**

Sykes, pp. 15-57 HC; pp. 3-55 PB

Caplan, Neil, "Arab-Jewish Contracts in Palestine After the First World War,"
_Journal of Contemporary History_ , Vol. 12, 1977, pp. 635-668.

Verete, Mayir, "The Balfour Declaration and Its Makers," _Middle Eastern
Studies_ , Vol. 6, No. 1, 1970, pp. 48-76.

**FEBRUARY 3:  
HERBERT SAMUEL'S TENURE AND LEGACY AS HIGH COMMISSIONER; THE MANDATE AND ITS
ADMINISTRATION-- WHAT WAS THE DUAL OBLIGATION? HOW WAS IT UNEQUAL?**

Sykes, pp. 58-125 HC; 56-98 PB.

Kedourie, Elli, "Sir Herbert Samuel and the Government of Palestine," _Middle
East Studies_ , Vol. 5, No. 1, 1969, pp. 44-68.

Joseph, Bernard, "Palestine Legislation Under the British," in Harry Vitteles
and Khalil Totah (eds.), _The Annals of the American Academy of Political and
Social Science_ , 164, Philadelphia, November 1932, pp. 39-46.

Sheffer, Gabriel, "The Images of Arabs and Jews as a Factor in British Policy
Towards Palestine," _Zionism_ , Vol. 1, Spring 1980, pp. 105-128.

Wasserstein, Bernard, "Herbert Samuel and the Palestine Problem," _English
Historical Review_ , Vol. XCI, No. CCCLXI, October 1976, pp. 753-775.

**FEBRUARY 10:  
ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES: THE LAND ISSUE (STEIN LECTURE)**

Graham-Brown, Sarah, "The Political Economy of Jabal Nablus, 1920-1948,"
_Studies in Economic and Sociological History of Palestine in the Nineteenth
and Twentieth Centuries_ , pp. 88-176.  

Stein, Kenneth W., "Palestine's Rural Economy, 1917-1939," _Studies in
Zionism_ , Vol. 8, No. 1, 1987, pp. 25-49.

Stein, Kenneth W., "Conclusions," _Land Question in Palestine_ , University of
North Carolina Press, 1984, pp. 212-221.

**FEBRUARY 17:  
THE ARAB AND JEWISH COMMUNITIES: ORGANIZATIONS, INSTITUTIONS, AND LEADERSHIP**

Hurewitz, pp. 17-80

Chizik, I., "The Political Parties of Palestine: Arabs and Jews," _Royal
Central Asian Society Journal_ , Vol. 21, 1934, pp. 94-129.

Horowitz, Dan and Moshe Lissak, "Ideology and Politics in the Yishuv," _The
Jerusalem Quarterly_ , Vol. 2, Winter 1977, pp. 12-26.

Matter, Phillip, "The Mufti of Jerusalem and the Politics of Palestine,"
_Middle East Journal_ , Vol. 42, No. 2, Spring 1988, pp. 227-240.

Nashif, Taysir, "Palestinian Arab and Jewish Leadership in the Mandate
Period," _Journal of Palestine Studies_ , Vol. 6, 1977, pp. 113-121.

Porath, Yehoshua, "The Palestinian-Arab Nationalist Movement," _Palestinian
Arab Nationalism_ , London: Cass, 1975, pp. 121-127.

**FEBRUARY 24:  
THE TENURE OF HIGH COMMISSIONER CHANCELLOR TO THE ARAB REVOLT, 1928-1936**

Sykes, pp. 126-187 HC; pp. 99-152 PB

Ofer, Pinhas, "The Commission on the Palestine Disturbances of August 1929:
Appointment, Terms of Reference, Procedure and Report," _Middle Eastern
Studies_ , Vol. 21, No. 3, July 1985, pp. 347-361.

Sheffer, Gabriel, "Intentions and Results of British Policy in Palestine:
Passfield White Paper," _Middle East Studies_ , Vol. 9, No. 1, 1973, pp.
43-60.

**MARCH 2:  
TURNING POINT IN THE MANDATE, 1936-1939: THE ARAB REVOLT, PEEL REPORT,
WOODHEAD REPORT, AND THE 1939 WHITE PAPER**

**SHORT PAPERS ARE DUE AT THE END OF CLASS TODAY**

Hurewitz, pp. 67-111

Sykes, pp. 188-241 HC; pp. 153-200 PB

Abboushi, W.F., "Road to Rebellion: Arab Palestine in 1930s," _Journal of
Palestine Studies_ , Vol. 6, No. 3, Spring 1977, pp. 23-46.

Arnon-Ohanna, Yuval, "The Bands in the Palestinian Arab Revolt, 1936-1939:
Structure and Organization," _Asian and African Studies_ , Vol. 15, 1981, pp.
229-247.

Bowden, Tom, "Politics of Arab Rebellion in Palestine, 1936-1939," _Middle
Eastern Studies_ , Vol. 11, No. 2, May 1975, pp. 147-174.

Cohen, Michael J., "Appeasement in the Middle East: The British White Paper on
Palestine, May 1939," _Historical Journal_ , Vol. 16, September 1973, pp.
571-596.

**MARCH 9:  
INDIVIDUAL DISCUSSION FOR RESEARCH PAPER TOPICS AND THEIR BIBLIOGRAPHIES**

**MARCH 16:  
SPRING BREAK- NO CLASS**

**MARCH 23:  
1940-1947: PALESTINE DURING THE WAR, DISINTEGRATION AND REVITALIZATION OF THE
ARAB COMMUNITY AND POST-WAR DIPLOMACY**

Hurewitz, pp. 112-273.

Stein, Kenneth W., "One Hundred Years of Social Change: The Creation of the
Palestinian Refugee Problem," in Silberstein (ed.), pp. 57-81.

Sykes, pp. 245-371 HC; pp. 203-311 PB

Bickerton, Ian J., "President Truman's Recognition of Israel," _American
Jewish Historical Quarterly_ , Vol. 58, December 1968, pp. 173-240.

Cohen, Michael J., "The British White Paper on Palestine, May 1939, Part II:
The Testing of a Policy, 1942-1945," _The Historical Journal_ , Vol. 19, No.
3, 1976, pp. 727-758.

Caplan, Neil, "A Tale of Two Cities: The Rhodes and Lausanne Conferences,
1949," _Journal of Palestine Studies_ , Vol. 21, No. 3, Spring 1992, pp. 5-34.

Jasse, Richard L., "Great Britain and Palestine Towards the United Nations,
1947," _Middle Eastern Studies_ , Vol. 30, No. 3, July 1994, pp. 558-578.

Khalaf, Issa, "The Reasons for the Disintegration of Palestinian Society with
an Emphasis on the Persistence of Factionalism," in _Politics in Palestine_ ,
Albany: State University of New York Press, 1991, pp. 231-248.

Kochavi, Arieh J., "The Struggle Against Jewish Immigration to Palestine,"
_Middle Eastern Studies_ , Vol. 34, No. 3, July 1998, pp. 146-167.

**MARCH 30:  
ISRAEL'S WAR OF INDEPENDENCE, THE ARAB WORLD, AND THE PALESTINIAN REFUGEES**

Hurewitz, pp. 274-331.

Reinharz, Jehuda, "The Transition from Yishuv to State: Social and Ideological
Changes;" Benny Morris, "Origins of the Palestinian Refugee Problem;" Avraham
Sela, "Arab Historiography of the 1948 War;" and Neil Caplan, "Zionist-Arab
Diplomacy: Patterns and Ambiguities on the Eve of Statehood," in Silberstein
(ed.), pp. 27-41, 42-56, 124-154, and 242-257.

Sykes, pp. 375-450 HC; 315-380 PB

Alami, Musa, "The Lesson of Palestine," _Middle East Journal_ , Vol. 3, No. 4,
October 1949, pp. 373-405.

In Silberstein, Laurence J. (ed.), _New Perspectives on Israeli History_ , New
York: New York University Press, 1991, pp. 42-56.

Shapira, Anita, "Conclusion: The Birth of the State," _Land and Power: The
Zionist Resort to Force, 1881-1948_ , Oxford University Press, 1992, pp.
353-370 and 414-415.

Teveth, Shabtai, "The Palestine Arab Refugee Problem and its Origin," _Middle
Eastern Studies_ , Vol. 26, No. 2, April 1990, pp. 214-249.

**APRIL 6:  
SUMMARY DISCUSSION OF RESEARCH PAPERS (4 STUDENTS)**

**APRIL 13:  
SUMMARY DISCUSSION OF RESEARCH PAPERS (4 STUDENTS)**

**APRIL 20:  
PASSOVER- NO CLASS  
SESSION MAY HAVE TO BE MADE UP DEPENDING COURSE PROGRESS**

**APRIL 27:  
SUMMARY DISCUSSION OF RESEARCH PAPERS (4 STUDENTS)**

**RESEARCH PAPERS ARE DUE AT THE END OF CLASS TODAY.**

**SUGGESTED TOPICS (PERSONALITIES) FOR SHORT PAPER DUE MARCH 2, 2000:**

Musa Alami  
David Ben-Gurion to 1936  
Count Bernadotte  
Norman Bentwich  
John Chancellor  
Lloyd George  
Hajj Amin al-Husseini  
Berl Kaznelson  
Golda Meir  
Herbert Samuel  
Harry Truman  
Chaim Weizmann 1930-1951  
Menachem Begin  
David Ben-Gurion, 1936-1951  
Ernest Bevin  
Ralph Bunche  
Winston Churchill  
Abdullah ibn-Hussein  
Vladamir Jabotinsky  
Fredrick Kisch  
Arthur Ruppin  
Ronald Storrs  
Chaim Weizmann to 1929  
Stephen S. Wise

Please use the information and questions below for your paper. In some cases,
these questions and criteria will not apply. You may have more criteria or
more important things to say about that person than what I have suggested
here. Please remember that the paper should be in prose not outline fashion,
with endnotes, and no longer than ten pages total in length.

We are interested in knowing what made this person a leader, how they emerged
as a leader, and what characteristics they portrayed as a leader. How did each
understand or manage the difference between short-term tactics and long-term
strategies? How was this person driven or directed by ideology? Did their
ideology change as they became older and more familiar with what they were
accomplishing?

Each paper should provide a biographical sketch in order to place the person
in a historical context. How did this person get along with peers and rivals?
Give examples of adaptability to crises or to local, regional, or
international changes in the political environment that required shifts one
way or another. What obstacles were in the way of accomplishing particular
goals? How were those obstacles overcome? How did this person win or obtain
respectability from peers and followers? How did they manage the difference
between process and substance? What means did they use to convince peers,
competitors, or enemies of the righteousness or correctness of their cause?
How well or poorly did your personality delegate authority? Why? Why not?
Remember this is only a guideline to define leadership.

**SUGGESTED TOPICS FOR THE RESEARCH PAPER DUE APRIL 27, 2000**

The Economy or Economies of Palestine, 1921-1949

British Rule in Palestine: The Impact of Changing Objectives for Arabs and
Jews, 1921-1947

Organization and Development of the Jewish Community

Arab and Jewish Education During the Mandate: A Comparison in National
Development

The Land Question in Palestine's Politics, 1918-1945

Changing British Attitudes and Zionist Responses Toward Jewish Immigration to
Palestine, 1921-1945

The Arab Revolt, 1936-1939: Cause and Effects

The Partition Controversy, 1937-1939

The 1940 Land Transfer Regulations: Motives and Effectiveness

Changing Objectives: The British and the Palestinian Arab Community, 1921-1947

The Last Years of the Mandate, 1945-1948: Arab, Jewish, and British Policies
in Palestine

The Politics of the Palestinian Arab Refugees: Who, Why, and When?

Illegal Jewish Immigration to Palestine, 1936-1949

Evolution of Zionist Ideology and Politics in Palestine, 1921-1945

Conferences for Policy Formulation: A Comparison of the St. James Palace
Conference (February 1939), London Conference (1946-1947), Rhodes and Lausanne
Negotiations (1948-1950)

Palestine in Post W.W.II Diplomacy: England, US and USSR

The Palestine Question at the United Nations, 1945-1949

The "New" Israeli Historians: Do They Have a Case for Zionist/Israeli
Complicity?  
  
---

