**ANNOUNCEMENT** :  





On-line syllabus: [www.uwyo.edu/mkamp](http://www.uwyo.edu/mkamp)

# History of the Modern Middle East

History 3220; Spring semester 2002

Tuesday and Thursday, 9:30-10:50 am

History Room 57 | Instructor: Marianne Kamp, Assistant Professor

email: [mkamp@uwyo.edu](mailto:mkamp@uwyo.edu); office phone: 766-0907

Hours: M 1-3, T 1-3 or by appointment  
---|---  
  
_**This syllabus appears in complete form only online.   It may change.  In
particular, links will be added to articles and documents that you are
expected to read.  Please check the on-line version on a regular basis for
changes and updates.**_

Required  Books:

William Cleveland, _A History of the Modern Middle East, 2 nd edition_

Mark Huband, _Warriors of the Prophet: The Struggle for Islam_

_A Century of Revolution: Social Movements in Iran_ , John Foran, editor.

Dan Cohn-Sherbok and Dawoud El-Alemi, _The Palestine-Israeli Conflict._

[Course Description,  Student Work and Responsibilities, Written Assignments,
Grading](4990info.htm)  

[Graduate Student Requirements](gradstudMME.htm)

[Web Links   ](MEweblinks.htm)



Week 1, Jan 22, 24

Topic: Introduction to the Rise of Islam | Read:  Cleveland, 1-19

[Qur'an](http://www.unn.ac.uk/societies/islamic/quran/naeindex.htm): [Surah
1](surah1.pdf), [112](surah112.pdf), [109](surah109.pdf), [107](surah107.pdf),
[98](surah98.pdf),[ 93](surah93.pdf), [90](surah90.pdf), [24](surah24.pdf)
(The link "Qur'an" will give you an on-line version, and you'll have to search
it; the number links will connect you to chapters loaded onto this website
from the Ahmed Ali translation, _Al-Qur'an: a Contemporary Translation_ |
Thursday Discussion: Be prepared for a discussion around the following
question: What are the major themes that are found in the Surahs of the Qur'an
that you read?  
---|---|---  
  










Week 2, Jan 29, 31

The Islamic World to 1800: a quick overview | Read: Cleveland 20-58,
[Lapidus](lapidus.pdf), on Sunni and Shi'a; capitulation treaties
[Hurewitz](HurewitzTi.pdf) [1580](cap1580.pdf), Hurewitz [1675](cap1675.pdf)

Conduct a web-search to find out: What is Sunni Islam?  What is Shi'a Islam?



| Thursday Discussion:  Based on your own web-searching, and on Cleveland,
what are the major differences between Sunni and Shi'a Islam?  How do their
approaches to religion and government differ? [Study questions](studyQsW2.htm)  
---|---|---  
  












Week 3, Feb 5 & 7

Radical Changes in the Ottoman Empire | Read: Cleveland 59-101

Articles: [ Burke, Ch 4](Shemsigul.pdf)

Documents: [Hatti-i-Sherif](gulhane.pdf) (on Tanzimat changes), [Islahat
Fermani](islahat.pdf) (on minority rights)

  | Discussion:  What role did European encroachment play in sparking changes
in Egypt?  What was the Tanzimat?  What were its main goals, and what
significant changes did it bring about in the Ottoman Empire?  How did
governmental reforms affect the lives of ordinary people, such as the slave
Shemsigul?  How did Muslims respond to colonialism?  
---|---|---  
  
















Week 4, Feb 12, 14

Islamic Reform

**Quiz** on Feb. 14 |  Read: Cleveland 102-129; Century of Rev Ch 1

Documents: [al-Afghani](Alafghani.pdf)

|  Which social groups in Iran took part in the uprising against the Shah's
concessions, and why?  

[Quiz terms](quiz1terms.htm)  
  
---|---|---  
  








Week 5 Feb 19, 21

Revolutions and Constitutions | Read: Cleveland 130-145, Century of Rev Ch 2

Documents:
Zionism--[Herzl'](http://www.geocities.com/vienna/6640/zion/judenstaadt.html)s
Jewish State.  Read Ch. 2

Write [ Essay 1](Essay1MME.doc) | Discussion: What social forces made the
first Iranian revolution (1906) take place?  What were their goals?

Herzl's Jewish State:  What problem was the Zionist movement trying to solve
with their proposal of a Jewish state?  
  
---|---|---  
  












Week 6 Feb 26, 28

**FIRST ESSAY DUE Feb 28**

The Ottomans and World War I

 **[Quiz repeat](quiz1repeatterms.htm) ** on Thursday in class | Cleveland 9;
Pal-Is Conflict Chs 1 & 6

Documents: [ Balfour
Dec](http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/mideast/balfour.htm)., [ Husayn-McMahon
letters](http://www.iea.org.il/blueprint/texts/d148.htm), [ Wilson's 14
points](http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/wilson14.htm), an Armenian account

  | Discussion: What is genocide?  Was what happened to Armenians in the
Ottoman Empire in 1915 genocide?

Also:  what claims were made for Palestine, and on what basis?

[Review for mid-term exam](3220MidRev.doc).  
---|---|---  
  


  







Week 7, March 5, 7

 Creating New Sates in the Middle East

**Midterm Exam** Thursday March 7 in class

| [Review ](3220MidRev.doc) Tuesday.

Mid-term exam Thursday.  



Read: Cleveland 10, 11, Century of Rev Ch 3

| Discussion: What is the significance of the nation-state, as opposed to
empire?  Are there similarities in the Turkish and Iranian approaches to
state-building with those of other nation-states in this post-WWI period? [be
prepared to talk about this on March 12--none of this will be on the exam]  
---|---|---  
  












Week 8, March 12, 14

Independence and neo-colonialism | Read: Cleveland 12, 13; Is-Pal Conf. 2, 3,
7, 8 | Discussion: What are the sources of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict?  
---|---|---  
  






Week 9, March 19, 21

 Socialism and the Cold War in the Middle East

 **Second essay** (due May 3): [Book Analysis](BookAnalysis.doc), based on one
of the books on the course [bibliography](Bibliography.doc). Grad students,
submit research paper topic April 4. |  Read: Cleveland 14; Century of Rev, 4,
5, 6

The [CIA in Iran](http://www.nytimes.com/library/world/mideast/041600iran-cia-
index.html): New York Times series. You do not need to read the whole article,
but take a look at it.

| Discussion:  What were the Kurdish and Azerbaijani movements trying to
accomplish?  Why did they fail?  What problems did Mossadegh/Mussadiq face in
trying to govern Iran following oil nationalization?  What were the major
reforms that the government of Iran proposed in the early 1960s, who opposed
them, and why?  (A couple of notes: Khumaini = Khomeini; the SAVAK was Iran's
secret police, famous for torturing dissidents)  
---|---|---  
  


















Week 10, April 2, 4

Nasser, Arab Socialism and ideology | Read: Cleveland  15, 16; Huband Ch 4
(73-93) | Discussion: What were the most significant political ideas and
forces that shaped the Arab countries in the 1950s and 1960s?

How were ideas of Islamic political reform shaped by al-Afghani, and how were
those ideas changed and transformed in the hands of Rashid Rida, Hassan al-
Banna and Sayyid Qutb?  
  
---|---|---  
  


  









Week 11, April 9, 11

The "Arab-Israeli" Conflict  | Read: Cleveland 17, 18; Pal-Is Conf 4 & 9 |
Discussion:   What role did other Arab states play in the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict?  
---|---|---  
  








Week 12, April 16-18

The Iranian Revolution and the Afghanistan conflict

Film, CNN's Cold War series, segment on the Afghanistan war.   | Read:
Cleveland 19 & 20; Cent of Rev, 7 & 8 | Discussion:   The Iranian Revolution:
Why?

Regarding the film:  what factors contributed to turning a Marxist coup in
Afghanistan into a decades-long war?  This film interviews numerous Afghanis:
what was the spectrum of ideas and wishes for the resolution of the conflict--
what did Afghanis really want?  How would you judge the US role in this
conflict?  What did the US do, why, and with what outcomes?  
  
---|---|---  
  






















Week 13, April 23, 25

The Intifada, the Gulf War, and Islamist movements

Film: Gulf War | Cleveland 21,22;

Huband, Ch. 1, 3 | Discussion: Introduction: Why does Huband use the terms
"political Islam" or "Islamism" rather than "fundamentalism?  Ch. 1.  Who are
the "Afghan Arabs"?  Who are the Taliban, and what kinds of policies are they
putting into place in Afghanistan?  Ch. 3:  How does the author explain
"Orientalism" and the scholarly conflict over this term?  What is the author's
assessment--is there any relationship between Orientalism and colonial control
of the Middle East?  What are the sources of the conflict in Algeria, and what
do Islamists stand for there?

  
  
---|---|---  
  




























Week 14, April 30, May 2

A Palestinian State?

**Second Essay due May 3** (submit by email)

  | Read: Cleveland 23, Pal-Is Conflict 5, 10, Debate; Huband 5-6

Link: [Olso Accords](http://www.usembassy-
israel.org.il/publish/peace/peaindex.htm)

[Water Resources](http://www.wws.princeton.edu/~wws401c/geography.html)

[Maps of Withdrawal](http://www.fmep.org/maps)

| Discussion: Is there a solution for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict?

  
  
---|---|---  
  














Week 15, May 7, 9

[Geography Quiz](Geography%20Quiz.htm), May 7

Political Islam, Radical Islam, Fundamentalism | Read: Cleveland 24, Huband
7-8 | Monday Discussion: Huband.     Ch. 8.  What is dual containment?  What
has it achieved?  Is there any relationship between dual containment and
changes in the role that Islamist political groups play?

Review for Final Exam  
---|---|---  
  






















