### History 540.02  
History of Iran



_INTRODUCTION_ : This course is meant to introduce students to a history of
Iran(Persia) during the Islamic period, 7th century c.e. to 20th century. In
doing so it will focus on two major themes or topics: the interaction of
nomadic and urban life and government and the culture of Iran. In doing so the
course will emphasize both how Iran is typical and unique in the context of
Middle Eastern/lslamic history.

Students will be asked to complete a map question: 5% of the grade, a short
paper on a topic given at the end of this syllabus: 25% of the grade, a short
paper on a topic of the students own choosing: 25% of the grade; three quizzes
scheduled for the 2nd, 5th and 8th week: 15% of grade, and a comprehensive
final examination:25% of the grade. The class will meet for two sessions of
slightly less than two hours on Monday and Wednesday. Students are expected to
attend regularly and participate in class discussions, which will account for
5% of their grade.



_BOOKS AND ASSIGNMENTS_ : Students will be asked to purchase two books: Franz
Rosenthal's abridge translation of Ibn Khaldun's, _Muqaddimah_ and any
available translation of Umar Khayyam's, _Rubaiyat_. Most of the other
readings will be found in the Middle East Reading room or on closed reserve,
as they are either out of print or far too expense to purchase.



_SCHEDULE_ :

_Week 1:_

  1. Monday: Introduction and Ibn Khaldun's, _Muqaddimah_. 
  2. Wednesday: Pre-lslamic Iran Empire, Religion and Economy in the Achaemenid and Sasanian periods. 

Readings (complete by the end of week 1)

  1. R. Schmitt, ``The Achaemenid Dynasty" in _Encyclopaedia Iranica_ , I (1985), 414-26. 
  2. M. Boyce, "Achaemenid Religion," in _Encyclopaedia Iranica_ , 1(1985), 426-29. 
  3. R.N. Frye, "The Political History of Iran under the Sasanians," in _The Cambridge History of Iran_ 3(1)(1983), 116-80. 
  4. Ehsan Yarshater, ``Iranian Common Beliefs and World-View," in _The Cambridge History of Iran_ 3(1)(1983), 343-58. 
  5. Ehsan Yarshater, "Iranian National History," in _The Cambridge History of Iran_ 3(1)(1983), 359-83. 



_Week 2:_

  1. Monday: Quiz and Movie; _Sudden Empire_. 
  2. Wednesday: Islamic history, and The _Shah Nama_. 

Readings:

  1. Ibn Khaldun, _The Muqaddimah_ , vii-154 and 263-95. 



_Week 3:_

  1. Monday: Discussion: Ibn Khaldun's theories, and the Seljuks. 
  2. Wednesday: Iranian poetry and Umar Khayyam. 

Readings:

  1. T. Talbot Rice, _The Seljuks_ , 25-41. 
  2. E.G. Browne, _A Literary History of Persia_ , 165-259. 
  3. Umar Khayyam, _The Rubaiyat_. 



_Week 4:_

  1. Monday: Chingiz Khan and the Mongol empire. 
  2. Wednesday: The Ilkhans of Iran and Post-Mongol Iran. 

Readings:

  1. Barthold Spuler, _History of the Mongols_ , 71-115. 
  2. Ata Malik Juvaini, _A History of the World Conqueror_ , xv-xxv and 1-190. 



_Week 5:_

  1. Monday: The Sarbadarids and Timur. 
  2. Wednesday: The Timurids and Timurid Harat. 

Readings:

  1. B. F. Manz, _The Rise and rule of Tamerlane_ , ix-106. 
  2. T. Lentz and Glenn Lowry, "Timur, the Images of Power," and "The Timurid Resonance," in Lentz and Lowry, _Timur and the Princely Vision_ , 17-66 and 303-27. 



_Week 6:_

  1. Monday: Harat-slide presentation and Shi'ism, sufism and the Safavids. 
  2. Wednesday: The Safavid State and Shah 'Abbes 

Readings:

  1. Said Amir Arjomand, _The Shadow of God and the Hidden Imam_ (1984), 1-201. 



_Week 7:_

  1. Monday: Movie: _The Great Sophy_ and Poetry and Art in Safavid Iran. 
  2. Wednesday: Safavid Silk and the World Economy.

Readings:

  1. Rudi Matthee, _Silk for Silver_...(Cambridge Press, forthcoming, 1998?), pp. to be assigned. 
  2. S.C. Welch, _A King's Book of Kings_. 1-76. 



_Week 8:_

  1. Monday: the 18th century interregnum and Qajars. 
  2. Wednesday: Qajar state and tribal politics. 

Readings:

  1. Gavin G.R. Hambly, "Agha Muhammad Khan and the Establishment of the Qajar Dynasty," _The Cambridge History of Iran_ 7( 199 1), 104-43. 
  2. Richard Tapper, "The Tribes in Eighteenth- and Nineteenth-Century Iran," _The Cambridge History of Iran_. 7, 506-41. 
  3. James Morier, _Hajji Baba of Isphahan_ (any edition). 



_Week 9:_

  1. Monday: Qajars and Modernization. 
  2. Wednesday: The Constitutional Revolution. 

Readings:

  1. Charles Issawi, 'European Economic Penetration," _The Cambridge History of Iran_ , 7, 590-607. 
  2. Hamid Algar, 'Religious Forces in Eighteenth- and Ninteenth-Century Iran," _The Cambridge History of Iran_ , 7, 705-31. 
  3. Hamid Algar, "Religious Forces in Twentieth Century Iran," _The Cambridge History of Iran_. 7, 732-64. 
  4. Mansoor Moaddel, _Class, Politics and Society in the Iranian Revolution_ (1993), "Theories of Revolution, 1-28. 



_Week 10:_

  1. Monday: Reza Shah and Modernization & the Mossadeq Crises. 
  2. Wednesday: The Iranian Revolution. 

Readings:

  1. Moaddel, _Class, Politics and Society in the Iranian Revolution_., 29-269. 



* * *

* * *

_Assigned Paper Topic_ : Ibn Khaldun

Explain the basic elements of Ibn Khaldun's theories of history as presented
in his work, The Muqaddimah, and then critique his theory. This is a demanding
work by a brilliant man. You must read and reflect carefully as you read, and
compare various sections of the work to see that Khaldun is precise and
logically consistent.

4-6 typed pages -approximately 1000-1250 words. Due: Monday of Week 4.(Late
papers will not be accepted except in cases of nomadic attacks!)

