![](../pics/eartha.gif) | ![](../pics/courses_earth.jpg)  
---|---  
|  |  [Geog 100](../courses/courses.htm) |  [Geog
200](../courses/courses200.htm) |  [Geog 300](../courses/courses300.htm) |
[Geog 400](../courses/courses400.html)  
---|---|---|---  
  
> **Geography 275**  
> **Geography of the Middle East**  
> **Fall, 2000**

>

> **JOE HOBBS, PROFESSOR**

>

>   * Fall Semester 2000 Syllabus

>

>   * [Reading Assignments](geog275_readings.html)

>

>  
>

>

> * * *

>

> **SYLLABUS** The purpose of this course is to introduce you to the Middle
East. The course is divided into quarters. The first of these deals mostly
with the ecological history of the region. We will look at the natural
resources of the region and at the adaptations of peasants to local
environments. In the second quarter we will examine nomadic pastoralism, the
problems of urban environments and the roots of the faith and culture of
Islam. The Arab-Israeli conflict will occupy most of the third quarter. We
will pay special attention to the ongoing peace process (hopefully it will be
ongoing) in the region. In the last quarter we will examine the reasons for
American involvement in the Middle East, and look at political and
environmental problems related to growing human populations, expanding deserts
and diminishing water.

>

> ![Gulf War - burning oil wells](oil_wells.jpg) When you finish this course
you will be able to think and speak effectively about the Middle East,
particularly about relationships between villagers, nomads and city folk;
about the environmental history of the region; about management of
environmental problems such as desertification and water shortages; about the
civilization of Islam; about the culture and management of sacred places;
about the reasons for war; and about the need for peace.

>

> ![Temple of Abu Simbal](abu_simbal.jpg)We will cover many topics that you
might think have nothing to do with geography. Geography, however, is much
more than place names and major industries. Peoples' cultures, religions,
world views and politics affect the landscape. It would be impossible to
understand the region without considering these factors. Geography as a
discipline is an ideal vehicle for understanding problems and finding
solutions in the troubled Middle East. Geography's great strength as a science
is its holistic perspective which integrates understanding of people with
understanding of the natural environment. Using geographic perspectives, in
this class we will understand where the Middle East has been as a region, and
where it is headed. We will then be in a good position to propose
alternatives: how to achieve peace, how to achieve a more equitable
distribution of scarce water resources, how to help an ignorant world become
more aware of the importance of this region.

>

> Throughout the course I will discuss the purposes and methods of doing
research in the Middle East, so that you might learn something about the role
of social science in general and geography in particular in analyzing regional
problems and proposing solutions to them.

>

> ![Petra](Jordan-petra2.jpg)In this class you will see much of the Middle
East. There will be slides and films which will bring images of this part of
the world and its problems to your critical eye. View these actively; engage
yourself in these images and ask questions about them. Try to develop a way of
"reading" the landscapes of the Middle East. Think about travelling to some of
these places. Then go to them...

>

> You are invited to improve the course by suggesting what is working and what
is not. Although this class follows a lecture format, you may ask questions
and volunteer opinions at any time. Discussion is an absolutely vital part of
the learning process, but it will not happen unless you make it happen. There
is no such thing as a foolish question -- if you want to know, ask! If you
know the answer to someone's question, or want to express an opinion, speak!

>

> This will be a challenging course. If you are looking for an easy class,
this is not it. The reading assignments will sometimes be heavy. The four
exams will be very thorough, and essay questions on them will require you to
think critically and write clearly. You will learn much and work hard in this
class.

>

> Your grade will be based on your performance on the four exams, with each
exam comprising 25% of your final grade (see attached description of the
grading systems). You must take the exam on the scheduled date. If you miss
the exam you will receive a failing grade on that exam. The only exception
will be for a student whose is able to furnish a documented excuse written and
signed by a doctor. No paper or other outside work may substitute for the
exams. Cheating will result in an "F" in the course and possible academic
suspension, so don't do it!

>

> Attendance in the class is required. A formal attendance record may be kept.
Repeated absences will be noticed, and in accordance with M.U. regulations
these will diminish your grade, even if you are performing well on the exams.
Any absence will certainly affect your grade, as much material on the exams
will be based exclusively on lecture and will not be found in your readings.
Come to class! And, do not come late to class. It is impolite and disruptive.
You will also miss important information and announcements concerning changed
assignments, new material and tips for studying for tests. If you cannot come
to class on time, you should not be enrolled in this course. Being late or
absent, or being disruptive or inattentive in class, will result in my issuing
Dean Ted Tarkow an 'Early Alert' report about you (see the attached form at
the end of this syllabus).

>

> -If you have a disability and need accommodations, please notify me as soon
as possible. You may also contact the Access Office, A048 Brady Commons,
telephone 882-4696.

>

> Office: 5 Stewart Hall.

>

> Office Hours: Tuesday and Thursday, 11:20-12:20 and 3:20-4:20. You may see
me in the office at these times or make an appointment for another time. Don't
think of a visit to my office as an imposition on me -- I am there for you.

>

> Telephone: 882-0586

>

> E-mail. Feel free to use it. I usually check it once a day:
[HobbsJ@missouri.edu](mailto:HobbsJ@missouri.edu)

>

> Web Page. I will require you to use this from time to time. Please take
advantage of the computer labs on campus if you do not have one at home. The
URL is <http://web.missouri.edu/~grcjh/>

>

> Required Texts (available in the University Bookstore at Brady Commons):

>

> -Hobbs, Joseph. Course Manual for Geography of the Middle East. M.U.
Bookstore Custom Publication.

>

> -Held, Colbert. 1994. Middle East Patterns (Second Edition). Boulder:
Westview.

>

> -Congressional Quarterly. 2000. The Middle East (Ninth Edition). Washington,
D.C.: Congressional Quarterly, Inc. ISBN: 1-56802-100-3

>

> -Hammond Atlas of the Middle East. 1996. Maplewood: Hammond

>

> -Omran, Abdel R. and Farzaneh Roudi. 1993. 'The Middle East Population
Puzzle.' Population Bulletin 48(1).

>

> You will also be required to read articles in your course manual and on
reserve at Ellis Library.

>

> Be sure to bring your Course Manual, Atlas and the relevant readings to each
class meeting.

>

> Here is the tentative lineup (subject to change) of lectures this semester:

>

> **PART ONE: THE PHYSICAL FOUNDATION**

>

> 1\. Tuesday, August 22: Introduction to the Course

>

> 2\. Thursday, August 24: No class, due to travel obligation

>

> 3\. Tuesday, August 29: Landscapes of the Middle East

>

> 4\. Thursday, August 31: The Natural History of Middle Eastern Deserts

>

> 5\. Tuesday, September 5: The Domestication of Plants and Animals in the
Middle East

>

> 6\. Thursday, September 7: Leopard Cave: Fieldwork on the Egyptian Neolithic

>

> 7\. Tuesday, September 12: The Ecological Trilogy, I: Village Life

>

> 8\. Thursday, September 14: **_Exam 1_**

>

> **PART TWO: THE CULTURAL FOUNDATION**

>

> 9\. Tuesday, September 19: The Ecological Trilogy, II: Pastoral Nomadism

>

> 10\. Thursday, September 21: The Ecological Trilogy, III: Urban Life

>

> 11\. Tuesday, September 26: An Introduction to Islam, I

>

> 12\. Thursday, September 28: Field Trip to the Islamic Center. Details to be
announced.

>

> 13\. Tuesday, October 3: An Introduction to Islam, II

>

> 14\. Thursday, October 5: Sinai, the God-Trodden Mountain

>

> 15\. Tuesday, October 10: **_Exam 2_**

>

> **PART THREE: THE ARAB-ISRAELI CONFLICT**

>

> 16\. Thursday, October 12: Jerusalem, Center of the World

>

> 17\. Tuesday, October 17: The Arab-Israeli Conflict I

>

> 18\. Thursday, October 19: The Arab Israeli Conflict II

>

> 19\. Tuesday, October 24: The Arab Israeli Conflict III

>

> 20\. Thursday, October 26: The Peace Process I

>

> 21\. Tuesday, October 31: The Peace Process II

>

> 22\. Thursday, November 2: **_Exam 3_**

>

> **PART FOUR: PROBLEMS IN THE GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE EAST**

>

> 23\. Tuesday, November 7:  Problems of Population and Urbanization, I

>

> 24\. Thursday, November 9: Problems of Population and Urbanization, II

>

> 25\. Tuesday, November 14: The Geography of Oil

>

> 26\. Thursday, November 16: No class, due to professional meeting (this
cancellation is subject to change).

>

> Tuesday, November 21 and Thursday, November 23: Thanksgiving Break!

>

> 27\. Tuesday, November 28: The Geography of Desert Storm

>

> 28\. Thursday, November 30: Desertification and Landscape Change

>

> 29\. Tuesday, December 5: Water Problems, I: The Aswan High Dam

>

> 30\. Thursday, December 7: Water Problems, II: Regional Conflicts

>

> 31\. Tuesday, December 12: Discussion and Preparation for the Final Exam

>

> 32\. Friday, December 15, 3:30-5:30 P.M., Parker Auditorium (Stewart 100).
**_FINAL EXAM_**.  
>  
>

> Grading System for Geography 275

>

> If you have taken Geography 1 or 2, you will be familiar with the grading
format for this course. Here's how it works:

>

> Generally, your score on an exam will be graded as 90-100 points, A range;
80-89 points, B range; 70-79 points, C range; 60-69 points, D range; and below
60, F range (yes, there is an F+!). Sometimes if test results suggest the test
was too hard, I will adjust accordingly; for example, 86-95 could be in the A
range, 76-85 in the B range, etc. So, your score on each test will be assigned
points that correspond with your actual letter grade on that test. Here's that
Geography 1 and 2 scale that will be used:

**A** |

A

| + |  13 points  
---|---|---|---  
  
A

|   |  12 points  
  
A

| - |  11 points  
![](pics/line.jpg)  
**B** |

B

| + |  10 points  
  
B

|   |  9 points  
  
B

| -  |  8 points  
![](pics/line.jpg)  
**C** |

C

| + |  7 points  
  
C

|   |   6 points  
  
C

| - |  5 points  
![](pics/line.jpg)  
**D** |

D

| + |  4 points  
  
D

|   |  3 points  
  
D

| - |  2 points  
![](pics/line.jpg)  
**F** |

F

| + |  1 points  
  
F

|   |  0  
  
> Your final grade will correspond to the total points of the four exams,
divided by 4. That number's letter equivalent is the final grade. (So, if you
had an A+, B, C and B+ on your four exams, you'd have 13, 9, 6 and 10 points,
totaling 38; divided by 4, 9.5 points; rounded up to 10 points = B+, final
grade.

>

> Please see me if you have any questions about the grading system. Remember
that with this system it is possible for all of you to get A's. That would
give me great pleasure, so try your best!  
>  
>

> [Joseph Hobbs' Homepage](http://www.missouri.edu/~grcjh/index.html)

>

> * * *

Back to top

[Copyright](http://www.missouri.edu/webmaster/copyright.html) (C) 2000
Curators of the University of Missouri-Columbia  
[DMCA and other copyright
information.](http://www.system.missouri.edu/ip/dmca)  
Published by: [Department of Geography](http://www.geog.missouri.edu)  
URL http://www.geog.missouri.edu/ghome.htm  
Please send comments to: webmaster => [Martin
Wills](mailto:willsm@missouri.edu)  
Last updated  05 September 2000

