Fall 2001



History of Western Civilization I

Hist. H113 Section C356/Section C357 (Honors College)



Time: M/W 9:30-10:45 a.m. Dr. Kevin C. Robbins

Place: CA 219 Associate Professor of History

Office: CA 504Q

Office Phone: 317-274-5819

E-MAIL: [krobbin1@iupui.edu](mailto:krobbin1@iupui.edu) FAX: 317-278-7800

Office Hours: M/W: 12:30-2:00 p.m.

(And by Appointment.)



**_Course Objectives_** : A course in the grand history of western
civilization is an excellent and rigorous means by which students can gain,
practice, and master critical reading, critical writing, critical thinking,
and critical, analytical study skills useful for a lifetime. Among the vital
skills to be developed by all students in the context of this history course
are: 1) ease and confidence in oral and written expression; 2) careful and
analytical reading habits developed through contact with original sources and
written masterworks of the eras surveyed; 3) the ability to read complex maps
for meaning to develop a clear understanding of old world geography and the
geo-cultural factors shaping the development of our western civilization; and
4) effective critical reasoning abilities. Diligent students can expect to
leave this course with not only a better knowledge of important historical
civilizations and events still powerfully shaping the world in which they live
right now, but also a greater knowledge of the fundamental skills of critical
study and argument essential for them to do well in all future university
courses and in all future working environments. The aim of this course is
**not** to fill the student's mind with a mass of useless, memorized, and
quickly forgotten  "facts." History is definitely **not** the mere
accumulation of uncontested  "facts" about prior times and peoples. It is not
(and never has been) an "objective" or un-biased mode of inquiry. History is
an **interpretation** of the past based upon scholars' highly idiosyncratic,
inherently contentious research and analysis of selected surviving evidence
about past, highly complex human beings, human communities, and cultures. Such
investigators, like good detectives, commonly reflect over, question, and
argue about the meaning and implications of all evidence gathered about their
human subjects. In these investigations argument and well-founded, cleverly
asserted opinions matter. All students **must** be ready to question and to
disagree over the meanings, significations, and implications of the readings
assigned and the civilizations they imperfectly communicate to us. All
students must therefore prepare themselves to express their opinions about
course readings and subjects as clearly, directly, and elegantly as possible.
In history, opinions--crafted as interpretations based upon careful analysis
of evidence--matter a great deal. **Your** opinions about what we study are
thus also important and you should be ready to share them in a civil,
intelligent, and determined manner orally and in writing with your instructor
and with your classmates. Following this path, we will work to break common
and pitiful misconceptions held by many about the nature of history and the
value of historical study. Students should thus always expect to have their
opinions challenged and to be pressed in consideration of how history, even
ancient history, continues to shape powerfully their own lives and values
today.

**_Required Course Readings_** : This course will address the institutional,
political, social, and cultural history of human communities from circa 4000
BCE to circa 1500 CE. While a textbook will be part of the assigned readings,
students will also read a number of beautiful, challenging, provocative, and
memorable original works written by authors living during the time periods
covered in the class. Each of these masterworks is far better reading than any
textbook. For quality of instruction about past human communities, their
values, preoccupations, arts, and obsessions, there can be no better sources
than such original texts. That is why we will read them, discuss them, and pay
very careful attention to them in class and in writing. These original works
by great authors male and female demand interpretation so that we may come to
see how they represent or communicate to us information about the societies in
which they were written. Be prepared. The textbook for this course is Jackson
J. Spielvogel, _Western Civilization_ , 4th ed., (Vol. A To 1500.) It is
abbreviated in the assignments below as **Spiel**. This textbook will provide
a basic narrative of important events during the periods of history covered.
Each assigned chapter or chapter section **must be read by the date listed
below**. This textbook will be supplemented by readings taken from great
masterworks by famous ancient authors. These additional required readings are
(in order of use):



Ferry, David. _Gilgamesh: A New Rendering in English Verse_. Farrar, Straus
and Giroux,

New York: 1992.

Plato. _Symposium_. Robin Waterfield (Translator). Oxford World's Classics,
Oxford

University Press, Oxford: 1994.

Marcus Aurelius. _Meditations_. A.S.L. Farquharson (Translator). Oxford
World's

Classics, Oxford University Press, Oxford: 1989.

Hildegard of Bingen. _Book of the Rewards of Life_. B.W. Hozeski (Translator).

Oxford University Press, Oxford: 1994.

J.C. Bondanella and Mark Musa (eds.). _The Italian Renaissance Reader_.
Meridian/

Penguin Group. New York: 1987.

Erasmus. _Praise of Folly_. Betty Radice (Translator). Penguin Books, London:
1993.



A final required course text, vital to an understanding of the geography and
geo-cultural factors shaping the history of western civilization is the
_Hammond Concise Atlas of World History_ (5th ed.)--abbreviated in assignments
below as **Atlas**. All required texts for this course are for sale in the
IUPUI Bookstore, Cavanaugh Hall, Basement, History Section, H113 Shelves.
**All students must purchase and read their own copies of the required texts.
Buy them all. **

**_Optional Supplemental Course Material from the World Wide Web_ :** Students
should be aware that a vast amount of material highly relevant to the cultural
history of western civilization can be found at various sites on the World
Wide Web. The instructor will be offering a selection of such useful web site
addresses via occasional handouts in class. All students are encouraged to
bring to the instructor's attention relevant new web sites they have found
while pursuing online research. Since all students in both sections of H113
addressed here will be expected to prepare several written essays and papers
on course topics, they should be aware that substantial assistance with the
logistics and forms of university-level writing is also available through
numerous **Online Writing Centers and Workshops**. One of the best such online
writing centers, providing many screens of information on all aspects of paper
organization and composition, can be found through Purdue University. Visit
OWL, Purdue's _O_ nline _W_ riting _L_ ab, at:



http://owl.english.purdue.edu/

**_ _**

**_Course Requirements_** : 1) Regular class attendance ( **one** unexcused
absence will lower your final grade for course participation). Class rosters
for student signature will be circulated at all class sessions. Make certain
that your name is on them. Students missing class will be penalized
accordingly. Students who cannot assure consistent attendance at all class
meetings should drop this class at once; 2) completion of **all** assigned
readings **by the dates listed below** ; 3) completion on time of all assigned
map projects; 4) completion of an in-class Mid-Term examination comprised of
essay questions; 5) completion of a non-comprehensive Final examination
comprised of essay questions; 6) completion on time of two research papers,
one on a topic assigned by the instructor and one on a topic chosen by the
student with the instructor's expressed approval; and 7) informed
participation in all class discussions. All written work submitted late is
subject to severe grade penalties.



**_Additional Requirements for Honors College Students in Section C357_** :
**** Honors College students in section C357 will be expected to meet all the
requirements above except point 6) on papers. Honors students instead will
write a total of six essays, one on each of the six major primary readings
(masterworks) listed above, addressing analytical topics relevant to each
reading assigned by the instructor. Length and format of essays will be
explained in class handouts. As will be explained, Honors students will have
the possibility of rewriting for improved credit those essays first graded
poorly by the instructor. All Honors Essays must be turned in on time. Late
papers will be graded down. Additionally, Honors College students will arrange
to attend an extra six special required class sessions devoted to intensive
discussion of the assigned masterwork readings. These sessions will be led by
the instructor personally and a hard effort will be made to schedule these
extra sessions at times and places on campus convenient to all Honors
students. Finally, all Honors College students will be required to subscribe
to a special e-mail listserv discussion group to be organized and maintained
by the instructor. Instructions on listserv subscription, required
participation, and activities will be forthcoming. Stay tuned.



**_Course Grading_** :



C356: Mid-Term 10% of final grade; Final 20% of final grade; Map Projects 15%;
Papers (2) 40% of final grade; and Class Participation 15% of final grade.



C357 (Honors): Mid-Term 5% of final grade; Final 10% of final grade; Map
Projects 10%; Papers (6) 60% of final grade; and Class Participation--
including listserv/e-mail--15% of final grade.



COURSE OUTLINE AND ASSIGNMENTS

( **All Readings to be Completed by the Date They Are Listed** )



Wed. 8/22 Course Introduction. Distribution of Syllabus. First Lecture on
History and

Geography. Distribution of First Map Project.





Mon. 8/27 Lecture on Ancient Civilizations and Their Geo-History.

Readings: **Atlas** , pp. 2-7 and 14-17; **Spiel** , Intro. and Chapt. 1,
pp.xxix-31.

**First Map Project Due in Class.**



Wed. 8/29 Lecture/Discussion: Rise of Middle Eastern Empires and the Culture
of

Mesopotamia

Readings: **Spiel** , Chapt. 2, pp, 32-54. Begin _Gilgamesh_.



Mon. 9/3 NO CLASS MEMORIAL DAY NO CLASS



Wed. 9/5 Lecture/Discussion: Themes, Problems, Drama, and History in
_Gilgamesh_.

Readings: _Gilgamesh_ , Intro. and Tablets 1-9, pp. ix-53.

**First Honors Essay Topics Distributed in Class.**

** **

Mon. 9/10 Lecture/Discussion: The End of Gilgamesh and the Lessons of
Mesopotamian

Culture.

Readings: _Gilgamesh_ , Tablets 10-12, pp. 54-92.

****

Wed. 9/12 Lecture: Early and Classical Greece.

Readings: **Atlas** , pp. 18-25; **Spiel** , Chapt. 3, pp. 55-90

**Second Map Project Distributed in Class.**

** **

Mon. 9/17 Lecture/Discussion: Who was Plato? Greek Philosophy: Subjects,
Methods,

Questions, and Problems. Lessons and Reflections of a Humane, Antagonistic,

And Erotic Culture.

Readings: Plato, _Symposium_ , Intro. (pp. xi-xli) and pp.3-24.

**First Honors Essay Due in Class.**

** First C356 Paper Topics Distributed in Class.**



Wed. 9/19 Discussion: Why Do Greeks Argue about Love?

Readings: Plato, _Symposium_ , pp. 24-41.

**Second Map Project Due in Class.**

**Second Honors Essay Topics Distributed in Class.**

** **

Mon. 9/24 Discussion: Socrates in Plato: Socratic Arguments and Lessons About
Love.

Readings: Plato, _Symposium_ , pp. 41-60.

****

Wed. 9/26 Lecture/Discussion: Greek Philosophy, Greek Systems of Experiment,
and

the Expansion of Hellenic Civilization in the Near East.

Readings; Plato, _Symposium_ , pp. 60-72; **Spiel** , Chapt. 4, pp. 91-113.



Mon. 10/1 Lecture: The Rise of Rome: Republican Society, Politics, and
Culture.

Readings: **Atlas** , pp. 26-27 and 30-31; **Spiel** , Chapt. 5, pp. 114-146.

  

Wed. 10/3 Lecture/Discussion: The Roman Empire: Society, Politics, and Culture
in

The Mediterranean World.

Readings: **Spiel** , Chapt. 6, pp. 147-177; Begin Marcus Aurelius,
_Meditations_ ,

Intro., pp. ix-xx.

**Second Honors Essay Due in Class.**

** First C356 Paper Due in Class.**

** **

Mon. 10/8 Discussion: Roman Imperial Culture and Philosophy. What is Stoicism?

Readings: Marcus Aurelius, _Meditations,_ Books 1-5, pp. 3-43.



Wed. 10/10 Discussion: The Roman Values of Self-Examination and Self-
Discipline.

Readings: Marcus Aurleius, _Meditations_ , Books 6-7, pp. 44-67.

**Third Honors Essay Topics Distributed in Class.**



Mon. 10/15 Discussion: The Lessons of Roman Rulership, Self-Denial, and
Observation

of the World. What Are We in Time? Roman Conceptions of Good and Evil.

Readings: Marcus Aurelius, _Meditations_ , Books 8-12, pp. 68-118.



Wed. 10/17 **IN-CLASS MID-TERM EXAM.**



Mon. 10/22 Lecture: Early European Middle Ages and Development of Christian
Church.

Readings: **Atlas** , pp 32-39 and 52-55; **Spiel** , Chapts. 7-8, pp.
179-235..

**Third Map Project Distributed in Class.**

** **

Wed. 10/24 Lecture/Discussion: The Cultural History of Religion and Religious
Values in

The European Middle Ages.

Readings: **Spiel** , Chapt. 9, pp. 237-265; begin Hildegard of Bingen, _Book
of the_

_ Rewards of Life_, First Part, pp. 1-65.

**Third Honors Essay Due in Class.**



Mon. 10/29 Discussion: The Religious Mysticism of a Medieval Woman: Images and

Meanings.

Readings: Hildegard of Bingen, _Rewards of Life_ , Third Part, pp. 119-169.

Wed. 10/31 Discussion: Medieval Visions of Heaven and the End of Time.

Readings: Hildegard of Bingen, _Rewards of Life_ , Sixth part, pp. 261-290.

** Third Map Project Due in Class.**

**Fourth Honors Essay Topics Distributed in Class.**



Mon. 11/5 Lecture: Late Medieval Europe and the Coming Renaissance.

Readings: **Atlas,** pp. 56-59 and 72-73; **Spiel** , Chapts. 10-11, pp.
266-324.

**Final C356 Paper Topics Distributed in Class.**



Wed. 11/7 Lecture/Discussion: Dimensions and Characteristics of the European

Renaissances.

Readings: **Spiel** , Chapt. 12, pp. 326-360; begin _Renaissance Reader_ ,
Petrarca, pp.

1-11 and Mirandola, pp. 178-183.

  

Mon. 11/12 The Agents and Aspects of "Renaissance."

Readings: _Renaissance Reader_ , Alberti, pp. 164-177 and Da Vinci, pp.
185-195.

**Fifth Honors Essay Topics Distributed in Class.**

Wed. 11/14 Renaissance Arts and Artists.

Readings: _Renaissance Reader_ , Cellini, pp. 306-351 and Michelangelo, pp.
375-

381.

**Fourth Honors Essay Due in Class.**



Mon. 11/19 The Renaissance Fashioning and Refashioning of the Self: The
Perfect

Courtier--to What Purpose?

Readings: _Renaissance Reader_ , Castiglione, pp. 197-257.

Wed. 11/21 NO CLASS THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY NO CLASS

Mon. 11/26 Lecture: The Northern European Renaissance: Modern Themes and Forms
of

Literary Expression and Cultural Criticism. The Work of Erasmus.

Readings: Erasmus, _Praise of Folly_ , Introduction, pp. xi-liii.

**Fifth Honors Essay Due in Class.**

** Sixth Honors Essay Topics Distributed in Class.**

** **

Wed. 11/28 Lecture/Discussion: Why Then Should We Praise Folly? Erasmus and
His

Satire of the World.

Readings: Erasmus, _Praise of Folly_ , pp. 3-54.



Mon. 12/3 Discussion: Who's the Bigger Fool? Mirth and Mockery in Erasmus.

Readings: Erasmus, _Praise of Folly_ , pp. 55-115.



Wed. 12/5 Discussion: The Religious Beliefs and Ethical Demands of a
Renaissance Fool.

What Will the Future Bring?

Readings: Erasmus, _Praise of Folly_ , pp. 116-134.



Mon. 12/10 Lecture/Discussion: Course Summation and Conclusion.

**Final C356 Paper Due in Class. No Exceptions.**

**Sixth Honors Essay Due in Class. No Exceptions.**







**FINAL EXAMINATION: FRIDAY, DECEMBER 14, 8:00-10:00 a.m. CA 219.**

