_For additional readings please consult the bibliography in Cleveland, Hollis
or ask your TF! For those writting on current issues check out the links page
on the web which will lead you to articles in major papers covering the ME:
http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~fc17/links/_  

Interesting new books:

Juergensmeyer, Mark. _Terror in the mind of God : the global rise of religious
violence_ Juergensmeyer has written a host of other insightful books on
religious extremists such as HAMAS, Hizbollah, Gush Emunim etc.

Armstrong, Karen _Battle For God_ also note her book on Jerusalem

Kinzer, Stephen, Cresent and Star: Turkey between Two Worlds

  

**_Arab Society and Intellectual History:_**

Sharabi, Hisham, _Neopatriarchy: A Theory of Distorted Change in the Region
(short sociological study)_

Ajami, Fouad. _The dream palace of the Arabs_ : a generation's odyssey _ Easy-
to-read, elegantly written without burdensome footnotes drawing from modern
Arabic literature and poetry to offer a critical assessment of today's Arab
society

Writing the self : autobiographical writing in modern Arabic literature /
Robin Ostle, Ed de Moor & Stefan Wild, eds.

**_ _**

Civil society in the Middle East; edited by Augustus Richard Norton

**_Current Politics in the Region_** _:_

Esposito, John, ed., _Voices of Resurgent Islam_

Esposito John & John Voll, _Islam and Democracy_

Owen, Roger, _State, Power, and Politics in the Making of the Modern Middle
East_ concise social and economic history

**_ _**

**_Issues of Culture & Religion_** _:_

Barakat, Halim, _The Arab world : society, culture, and state_ a sociological
study.

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein _Ideals & Realities of Islam_ Nasr is a champion of
Sufism and traditional religion over against modernity. His writing is highly
philosophical

Adonis (Ali Ahmad Said), _Pages of Day and Night_. Along with Mahmoud Darwish
and Nizar Qabani the premier poet of the Arab world. Consult Ajami's "Dream
palace of the Arabs" for a nice synoposis of their significance and work

**_ _**

**_History of Muslim-Christian Relations_** _:_

Daniel, Norman, _Islam and the West: The Making of an Image_ Excellent
historical overview and good reference book

Hitti, Phillip, _Islam and the West_ Ditto as above

Hodgson, Marshall G. S., _Rethinking world history : essays on Europe, Islam,
and world history_ / ed. Edmund Burke, III.

Cragg, Kenneth.Jesus and the Muslim: An Exploration

The Arab Christian : a history in the Middle East / Kenneth Cragg. By far the
most illuminating study of Arab Christians and their present predicament. Also
see the link: http://www.boston.com/globe/nation/packages/christianity/

**_ _**

**_Arab-Israeli Conflict, Jewish and Palestinian History:_**

Buber, Martin, _A Land of Two Peoples_

Buber, Martin, _Palestine, a Bi-national State_

Edward Said; all books dealing with the conflict by the foremost Palestinian
intellectual. His articles are at: http://www.edwardsaid.org/

Chacour, Elias, _Blood Brothers_

Dimont, Max, _Jews, God and History_ Majestic study of Jewish History

Lewis, Bernard, _The Jews of Islam, Semites and Anti-Semites; Middle East
Mosaic (a^n extensive anthology of letters, poetry and literature drawn from
various centuries from Arab, Jewish and Turkish writers_ One of the most
erudite scholars of the Middle East

Pappe, Ilan, _The Making of the Arab-Israeli Conflict ; The Israel/Palestine
Question_

The war for Palestine : rewriting the history of 1948 / edited by Eugene L.
Rogan and Avi Shlaim

.

Lucas, Noah, _The Modern History of Israel_

**_Broad Historical Surveys:_**

Hourani, Albert, _A History of the Arab Peoples_

Hodgson, Marshall, _The Venture of Islam, Vol. I-III (comprehensive &
detailed) _

Voll, John, _Continuity & Change in the Modern World_

**_History of Islamic Science_**

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein, _Science & Civilization In Islam_

**_Women in the Middle East_**

Ahmed, Leila, _Women and gender in Islam : Historical Roots of a Modern
Debate_

Keddie, Nikki, _Women in Middle Eastern history : Shifting Boundaries in Sex
and Gender_

Mernissi, Fatima _Beyond the Veil. Male-Female Relationships in Modern Muslim
Society_

Mernissi, Fatima _Harem Politique. Women and Islam_

Shaykh, Hanan _Beirut Blues, Story of Zahra (novels by a leading Muslim
feminist)_

**_Egypt_** :

Abdel Malek, Anouar _Egypt, Military Society : the army regime, the left, and
social change under Nasser_

Mansfield, Peter, _Nasser's Egpyt_

**_Iran_** :

Bill, James, _The Eagle & the Lion: The Tragedy of American-Iranian Relations_

Mottahedeh, Roy, _The Mantle of the Prophet: Religion & Politics in Iran_

Maalouf, Amin, _Samarkand (historical fiction)_

**_Lebanon & Syria:_**

Fisk, Robert, _Pity The Nation_ Also see Fisk's critical, often scathing
articles on current events across the ME:  
http://www.independent.co.uk/search.jsp?keywords=robert+fisk

Maalouf, Amin, _The Rock of Tanios (novel)_

**_Turkey_** _:_

Ahmad, Feroz, _The Making of Modern Turkey_

_The Western question in Greece and Turkey : a study in the contact of
civilisations (a gripping account of the tragic events of WWI. A witness to
the events, Toynbee offers the most eloquent and ethical deconstruction to
date of the specter of a 'clash of civilizations' as it pertained to the mass
killings of Turks, Greeks and Armenians at the dawn of the 20th century_ by
Arnold J. Toynbee.

Kafadar, Cemal, _Between Two Worlds_

Yalman, Ahmed Emin, _Turkey in my Time._ an elegantly written personal account
of Turkey's journey in the 20th century

Zurcher, Eric, _Turkey: A Modern History_

**General:**

_Oxford Encyclopedia of the Modern Islamic World_ , ed. Esposito

  _Index Islamicus_

_Political Encyclopedia of the Middle East,_ ed. Avraham Sela __

![](/~fc17/images/dot.gif)  
  
![](/~fc17/images/dot.gif)

|

* * *

[[Home Page](/~fc17)] [[Teaching Staff](/~fc17/instructors)]
[[Sections](/~fc17/section)] [[Lectures](/~fc17/lecture)]
[[Syllabus](/~fc17/syllabus)] [[Handouts](/~fc17/handouts)]
[[Assignments](/~fc17/assignments)] [[Internet Resources](/~fc17/links)]
[[Class Discussion](/~fc17/discussion)]

* * *

Please send comments to [Mark Farha](mailto:farha@fas.harvard.edu)  
  
_URL:
http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~fc17/assignments/assignments_1.html_  
last modified:  09/25/99

Copyright (C) The President and Fellows of Harvard College

* * *

