HISTORY OF THE MIDDLE EAST

HIST0354Spring 2000 Drs. McFarland and Liebeskind

CLASSROOM: Haley 3332, 8:00-9:30 Tuesdays and Thursdays

TEXTS: Cleveland, William L., A History of the Modern Middle East, Westview,
1999, second edition, 0813334896

Martin, Richard C., Islamic Studies: A History of Religions Approach, Prentice
Hall, 1995, 0132055430

Fernea, Elizabeth W., Guests of the Sheikh, Doubleday, any edition, 0385014856

OFFICE: Hargis 104, by appointment (McFarland); Thach 309, (Liebeskind)

OFFICE TELEPHONE: 844-2131 (McFarland), 844-6644 (Liebeskind)

E-MAIL ADDRESS: MCFARSL@AUBURN.EDU, LIEBECL@AUBURN.EDU

SCOPE: HIST0354 is a survey of the major developments in the history of the
Middle East in the twentieth century. The course will follow a generally
chronological approach, but will also examine certain political, social,
economic, diplomatic, artistic, literary, religious, military, and
intellectual themes.

OBJECTIVES: Each student should: acquire a solid foundation of the great
processes of Middle Eastern history, acquire comprehension of the causes and
effects of Middle Eastern history, acquire an understanding of both sides of
the more controversial issues of the Middle East today, and improve learning
and writing skills.

READINGS: Reading assignments are listed in the tentative schedule for the
course.

ATTENDANCE POLICY: Attendance will be taken for record-keeping purposes and to
assist in determining borderline grades. Make-up exams will be given only by
special arrangement based on legitimate excuses. There will be no unannounced
exams.

GRADING CRITERIA: There will be three exams for this course. The final
examination will be comprehensive.

  
  

Map Exercise 100 pts

Examination #1 200 pts

Examination #2 200 pts

Review of Guests of the Sheikh 200 pts

Final Examination 300 pts

TOTAL 1000 pts

  
  

See the attached list of locations for the map exercise. Students will be
required to sketch an outline map of the Middle East, including national
boundaries, and locate a number of these locations on their maps.

  
  

Each student must submit a critical review essay of 750 to 1,250 words (three
to five double-spaced typed pages), by the date given below. The purpose of
the essay is for each student to evaluate and analyze the basic themes,
lessons, and contributions of Guests of the Sheikh.

  
  

Course grades will be assigned according to the following scale:

  
  

A=900-1000 pts

B=800-899 pts

C=700-799 pts

D=600-699 pts

F=599 and below

  
  

Unless prior arrangements are made with the instructor, any course
requirements not completed by Dead Day, except for the final exam, will be
awarded a grade of zero. TEN PERCENT OF THE POSSIBLE POINTS WILL BE DEDUCTED
FOR EACH CLASS DAY AN ASSIGNMENT IS LATE. Each student is responsible for
insuring all course requirements are completed. Adjustments to the final
examination schedule must be made before the final day of class.

WWW HOMEPAGE: I am attempting to post such information as the syllabus,
applicable web sites, and lecture outlines on my WWW homepage. You may access
it at http://www.auburn.edu/~mcfarsl.

SPECIAL ACCOMMODATIONS: Any student needing special accommodations should
contact Dr. Kelly Haynes, director of the Program for Students with
Disabilities, 1232 Haley Center.

  
  

TENTATIVE CLASS SCHEDULE

  
  

28 March Introduction/Islam

30 March Islam (Cleveland pp. 1-19)

4 April Islam (Martin-all)

6 April Islam (Martin-all)

11 April Western Imperialism/World War I-- **MAP EXERCISE DUE** (Cleveland pp.
146-168)

13 April EXAMINATION #1 (Cleveland 1-168)

18 April State Building (Cleveland pp. 172-189)

20 April State Building (Cleveland pp. 190-232)

25 April Palestine/Israel (Cleveland pp. 233-264

27 April World War II/Iranian Crisis (Cleveland pp. 265-292)

2 May Women and Ethnic Minorities in the Modern Middle East

4 May Oil/Westamination/Westoxication

9 May EXAMINATION #2 (Cleveland pp. 172-292)

11 May Iranian Revolution (Cleveland pp. 410-435)

16 May Arab-Israeli Dispute (Cleveland pp. 293-335)

18 May Arab-Israeli Dispute (Cleveland pp. 336-384)

23 May Arab-Israeli Dispute-- **FERNEA REVIEW DUE** (Cleveland pp. 385-409)

25 May Islam in the Modern World

30 May Iraq and the Gulf War (Cleveland pp. 436-482)

1 June Whither the Middle East? (Cleveland pp. 483-524)

2 June Dead Day

7 June FINAL EXAM, 2-4:30 (Cleveland, Martin, Fernea)

For the map exercise, students must be able to locate all of the following on
an outline map of the Middle East. Students are also responsible for the
spatial location of the national boundaries of the area.

  
  

Amman

Ankara

Azerbaijan

Baghdad

Bahrain

Beirut

Black Sea

Bosphorus

Cairo

Caspian Sea

Damascus

Dardanelles

Dead Sea

Egypt

Euphrates River

Gaza Strip

Golan Heights

Gulf of Suez

Iran

Iraq

Israel

Istanbul

Jerusalem

Jordan

Jordan River

Kurdistan

Kuwait

Lebanon

Libya

Mecca

Medina

Mediterranean Sea

Nile River

Oman

Palestine

Persian Gulf

Qatar

Red Sea

Riyadh

Saudi Arabia

Sea of Marmara

Shatt al-Arab

Sinai Peninsula

Sraits of Hormuz

Suez Canal

Syria

Tehran

Tel Aviv

Tigris River

Turkey

United Arab Emirates

West Bank

Yemen

  
  

The spelling of these locations may vary.

