![](http://socrates.berkeley.edu/~davidyag/bar3.gif)

**History 109c:**

**The History of the Middle E **ast from the 18th Century to the Present****

  
**Spring 2002**

[David Yaghoubian](mailto:davidyag@socrates.berkeley.edu)  
2212 Dwinelle Hall

**_Description_ :  ******

** **

This course surveys the history of the Middle East since the eighteenth
century. Emphasizing the political and social history of Turkey, Iran, Iraq,
Egypt and the Levant (Lebanon, Palestine/Israel, Syria, Jordan) the course
seeks to provide students with an understanding of the broad historical
forces, conflicts and major events that have shaped the contemporary nations
of the modern Middle East, and an awareness of how their principal
institutional, social and cultural features were acquired. The course also
examines the impact of these major transitions and events on the lives of
"ordinary" men and women, and locates their role and agency in the history of
the modern Middle East. The course is divided into three parts. In Part I we
will survey the forces at work during the long 19th century (c. 1790-1914)
that led to the demise of the Ottoman Empire and Qajar rule in Iran, and that
provide the background to twentieth century developments: European
imperialism, the world economy, indigenous self-strengthening movements,
Islamic reform and nationalism.  Part II focuses on developments in the Middle
East in the fifty years following World War I, including the emergence of
modern national states, the impact of the petroleum industry and economic
development strategies, the evolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict, the
legacies of colonialism, and the effects Cold War.  In Part III we will study
trends and events since 1970 such as Islamic political movements and the
Islamic revolution in Iran, the politics of oil, the widening of the Arab-
Israeli conflict, the Lebanese Civil War, the Iran-Iraq War, the Gulf War, the
role of the United States and the political dynamics of the post Cold War era.
Finally, we will consider contemporary political, social and economic issues
and assess current prospects for peace and stability in the region.

**_Course structure_ :**

Lectures: As a general rule class will consist of a one-hour lecture that will
often include slides or a short video presentation followed by questions and
discussion covering both the lecture and assigned readings. Students are
expected to complete weekly reading assignments before coming to class. Feel
free to ask questions during the lecture for clarification, or if you miss
something, but keep in mind there will be ample time after the lecture for you
to offer extended opinions, arguments, and responses to the content of the
class.

The following written assignments are required of each student:

1)      A brief [**map
exercise**](http://socrates.berkeley.edu/~davidyag/Map-109c-2001.html), to be
distributed January 22nd, and due in class **January 31**.   Its purpose is to
familiarize students with important geographical features and cities of the
Middle East.

2)      An in-class **midterm examination** , to be held **March 5** ,
consisting of identifications and one essay question. The midterm will cover
material from the first six weeks of the course.

3)      **Either** of the following:

a.       A **final examination** consisting of two components: a take home
essay and an in-class exam. The take home portion will be distributed ****
after lecture on **May 14** , and will be due **Monday, May 20 by 5:00 PM.**
The in-class portion will be held on **Friday, May 24** **(12:30-3:30 PM.
Place TBA)** and will include identifications and one essay question.

b.      A **term paper** of at least 15 typed pages on a topic approved by the
instructor.   (Note: paper topics due by **Feb. 26**. Papers are **** due
**Monday, May 20 by 5:00 PM** )

 Grades will thus be based on the following components:

       Midterm exam                                                                                 40%

       Final exam or paper                                                                         60%



**_Required Reading_ :  **The following books can be purchased from the UC
Bookstore on campus. All are available in paperback.



M.E. Yapp, _The Near East Since the First World War: A History to 1995_. 2nd
Edition (Longman, 1996)

Donald Quataert, _The Ottoman Empire, 1700-1922_ (Cambridge, 2000)

Charles D. Smith, _Palestine and the Arab-Israeli Conflict_ 4 th Edition. (St.
Martins, 2001)

Nikki R. Keddie, _Roots of Revolution_ (Yale, 1981)

Edmund Burke, III, ed., _Struggle and Survival in the Modern Middle East_
(Berkeley, 1993)



A **two-volume course reader** is also required and is available for purchase
at Krishna Copy on the corner of Telegraph and Dwight Way.

**_Reading assignments_ : **Weekly reading assignments average 140 pages, and
should be completed before the first meeting of each week.

**_Recommended Reading_ :** In addition, the following books are also
available in paperback.



Roy Mottahedeh, _The Mantle of the Prophet_ (OneWorld, 2000)

Sattareh Farman Farmaian, _Daughter of Persia_ (Crown/Anchor 1993)

Elizabeth Thompson, _Colonial Citizens_ (Columbia, 2000)

Joel Beinin and Joe Stork, eds. _Political Islam: Essays From Middle East
Report_ (Berkeley, 1997)

Nikki Keddie and Beth Baron, eds., _Women in Middle Eastern History_ (New
Haven, 1991)

Edward Said, _Covering Islam_ (New York, 1997)

Bernard Lewis. _The Emergence of Modern Turkey_. (Oxford, 1975)

John Esposito, _The Islamic Threat: Myth or Reality._ 3 rd Edition ****
(Oxford, 1999)

David W. Lesch, _The Middle East and the United States: A Historical and
Political Reassessment_ (Boulder, 1999)



**_Readings on Reserve_ : **All of the required and recommended reading has
been placed on reserve at Moffitt Library. Both volumes of the course reader
will be placed on reserve at the History Department Library (2337 Dwinelle
Hall). A full list of recommended reading is available via the course Web site
at:  **http://socrates.berkeley.edu/~davidyag.** You can also **** access a
collection of maps relevant to the course, an extensive listing of recent
books on the Middle East, and links to Middle Eastern history resources
online. ****

** **

**_Films on Reserve_ : **Visit the course Web site to access a listing of
films on the modern Middle East available

for viewing at the Media Resources Center in Moffitt Library.
(http://socrates.berkeley.edu/~davidyag/films.html) ****

** **

My office is 2212 Dwinelle Hall. Telephone 333-7320. Office hours are Mondays
1-2, Wednesdays 2:00-4:00 or by appointment. I can always be reached via
e-mail at davidyag@socrates.berkeley.edu. ****

** **

** **

** **

**                                           ****_C ourse Outline, Reading
List and Schedule of Lectures_** ** __**



**                      Part I: Global Economic Shifts and Political
Transitions 1750-1920**

** **

##  Week 1              Introduction; Muslim Empires and Islamic Civilization
in the Middle East to 1790 C.E.

## Jan 22                Course introduction and orientation  (Map assignment
handed out)



Jan 24 **                 **Civilization and institutions of the **** Ottoman
Empire; Safavid Iran's Shi'ite Legacy; Afshars;

                          Zands  and unification under Qajars



  Read:               Donald Quataert, _The Ottoman Empire 1700-1922_ pp.
1-36, 89-109  

                          Nikki Keddie, _Roots of Revolution_ , pp. 1-23                                       

                      

  Reader Vol. I:      Ernest Tucker, "Nadir Shah and the Ja'fari Madhhab
Reconsidered"

                              John Perry, "The Zand Dynasty"

                            

_           Recommended_:  Edward Said, "Islam Through Western Eyes"

                                    Cambridge Encyclopedia of Islam and North Africa, Ch. 1

                               __

**_ _**

**_Week 2_**                               **The Middle East in the Era of
Reform**

Jan 29                 Introduction to the Long 19th Century in the Middle
East; Global Economic and Strategic Shifts;

                           The Ottoman Empire in the Era of Reform 



Jan 31                 Muhammad Ali's Egypt

                            **Map assignment due**

                                               

Read:                Quataert, pp. 36-88   (50)

                         Charles D. Smith, _Palestine and the Arab-Israeli Conflict_   Ch. 1   

                         Edmund Burke, III, ed. _Struggle and Survival in the Modern Middle East_ , Ch. 1  

  

    Reader Vol. I:    Kemal Karpat, "The Transformation of the Ottoman State, 1789-1908"       

                              M.S. Anderson, ed., "The Struggle for Internal Reform in the Ottoman Empire"      

                              F. Robert Hunter, _Egypt Under the Khedives_ Chs 1-3.                                         

           

** **

##  Week 3               The Middle East in the World Economy; Indigenous
Responses to Colonialism

Feb 5              Egypt under the Khedives; Young Ottomans and Sultan Abd al-
Hamid; Islamic Modernism and

                       Pan Islam



Feb 7              Suez Canal; Evolution of the Petroleum Industry in the
Middle East



Read:               Quataert, pp. 110-171

                             

   Reader Vol. I:      Roger Owen, _The Middle East in the World Economy_ Ch.
5  

                               Albert Hourani, _Arabic Thought in the Liberal Age, 1798-1939_ , Chs. 5-6                              

                       _Recommended_ :   Evelyn Baring Cromer, Selections from _Modern Egypt_                            

##  

## Week 4                                   Qajar Iran



Feb 12               Qajar Iran in the 19th century



Feb 14               Iran's Constitutional Revolution

                   

Read:                Keddie, pp. 24-78  

                         Burke, Chs. 2-5, 7 



  Reader Vol. I:     Abbas Amanat, "Qurrat al-'Ayn: The Remover of the Veil"  

                             Ervand Abrahamian, "Oriental Despotism: The Case of Qajar Iran" 



          _Recommended_ :    Hamid Algar, _Religion and State in Iran 1785-1906_ , Chs. 1, 14, 15 

                                      Mangol Bayat-Philipp, "Women and Revolution in Iran, 1905-1911"  

  

## Week 5                              Nationalism, Revolution and the First
World War

##  

Feb 19            Origins of Nationalism in the Middle East; Young Turks,
Turkish Nationalism, and the C.U.P.;

                      Origins of Political Zionism



Feb 21            The Impact and Aftermath of the First World War; The Arab
Revolt, Conflicting Agreements

                

Read:              Quataert  pp.  172-197; Burke, Chs. 6, 8-10; Smith, Chs. 2-
3

                          

  Reader Vol. I:        M.S. Anderson, ed., "The First World War and the Peace
Settlement, 1914-23"

                         

_            Recommended_:     Richard Hovannisian and Stanford Shaw, "Forum:
The Armenian Question"  

                                        Elizabeth Monroe, _Britain 's Moment in the Middle East, 1914-1956_, Chs. 1, 2  

###  

###  

### Part II: The Middle East c. 1920-1970



## Week 6                           The Colonial Mandates; Modernization of
Turkey and Iran



Feb 26         Colonial Rule in the Levant and Egypt; The "Liberal
Experiment"; Rising Tensions in Palestine

                    **Paper topics due**

                                     

Feb 28         The Reforms of Reza Shah Pahlavi and Mustafa Kemal Ataturk in
Comparative Perspective

                    **Midterm study guide handed out** ****

                            

Read:          Keddie pp. 79-112  **     **

**                    **Burke, Chs. 11, 12, 15

                   Smith Ch 4. 

                   M.E. Yapp, _The Near East Since the First World War_ Ch. 1 

                  

     Reader Vol. I:  Bernard Lewis, _The Emergence of Modern Turkey_ , Ch. 8  



       _Recommended_ :       Albert Hourani, _A History of the Arab Peoples_ , Chs. 19-20 

                                     Elizabeth Monroe, Britain's Moment in the Middle East, 1914-1956, Ch. 4 

##  

**  
**

##  Week 7                  World War II in the Middle East  



March 5                  **Midterm Exam   **

**                                        **                             ****

March 7          The Middle East in the Second World War; Saudi Arabia, the
United States and ARAMCO

#  

Read:              Smith Ch. 5 ; Burke, Chs. 16, 18 ;  Yapp Ch. 2  

                       ****

##  Week 8           Aftermath of the Second World War; Demise of the Mandate
System and the Birth of Israel



March 12        Struggle for Palestine and the Birth of Israel     **
**



March 14        Rise of Military-Socialist Regimes (Egypt, Syria, Iraq); Free
Officers and the Ba'th; Changing

                       Gender Relations        



Read:           Keddie Ch 6

                    Yapp, Chs 3-5           

                 

## Week 9          Cold War and Nationalization Movements



March 19         Cold War in the Middle East; Azerbaijan Crisis, Mossadegh and
Operation Ajax ********

** **

March 21         Arab Nationalism in the Age of Nasserism; Suez Crisis; The
UAR



## Read:         Keddie Ch. 7;  Yapp  Chs. 6-7; Smith Ch. 6  

              

   Reader **Vol. II** :&nb

