# John Iskander

[Jiskander@gsu.edu](mailto:Jiskander@gsu.edu)  
---  
  
* * *  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

******EDUCATION**

  
  

**Ph.D., 2001**

University of California, Santa Barbara Religious Studies

_Specialization: Early and Medieval Islamic History,_

_Islamic Faith and Practice,_

_History of Religions, Arabic Language and Literature_

  
  

**Master of Arts, 1995**

University of California, Los Angeles Islamic Studies Program

_Specialization: Early Islamic History,_

_Arabic Language and Literature, Study of Religion_

  
  

**Center for Arabic Study Abroad, 1993-1994**

American University in Cairo

_Twelve-month fellowship for intensive study of literary and spoken Arabic_

  
  

**Bachelor of Arts, 1991**

Santa Clara University History and Political Science

  
  

**AWARDS AND FELLOWSHIPS**

  
  

_Fulbright-Hays,_ full-year dissertation grant, 1999-2000

  
  

_American Research Center in Egypt,_ research grant, 1999-2000 (declined) __

  
  

___Malcolm and Ann Kerr Award for Best Paper_ , Jusur conference, 1998,
"Interpreting the Barghawata: Twentieth Century Scholarship on a Medieval
Berber Religious Polity"

  
  

_Charles Wendell Memorial Award in Middle Eastern and Arabic Studies_ , UCSB
Religious Studies, 1998

  
  

_Rowny Fellowship_ , UCSB, 1995-1996, 1998-1999

  
  

_Research Grant_ , International Studies and Overseas Programs, UCLA, 1995

  
  

_Center for Arabic Study Abroad Fellowship_ , Cairo, 1993-1994

  
  

_University Fellowship_ , UCLA 1992-1993

  
  

******TEACHING EXPERIENCE IN ISLAM**

  
  

**Georgia State University, Fall, 2001--present**

Assistant Professor in Islam and Religious Studies

  
  

**Occidental College, Fall, 1999**

****Adjunct Professor of Islam

  
  

**University of California, Santa Barbara, Fall, 1998**

Instructor in Islam

  
  

******COURSES TAUGHT IN ISLAM AND RELIGIOUS STUDIES**

Introduction to Islam,

Georgia State University, Occidental College, UC Santa Barbara

Course covers the major historical events, institutions and beliefs of Islam,
and the diversity of Islamic belief and practice over time and in various
settings. A wide array of scholarly readings, authentic documents, videos,
slide presentations and classroom discussions enable students to view Islam
from a variety of perspectives.

  
  

**Pilgrimage Across Religious Traditions**

Georgia State University

Examination of the performance of pilgrimage and its importance in a variety
of religious traditions. Readings include Mircea Eliade, Victor Turner, and
others who provide critiques of the dominant models for understanding
pilgrimage.

  
  
  
  

The Life of the Last Prophet**, 8/1999 - 12/1999

Occidental College, Georgia State University (2002)

Upper-division seminar (designed with Sandra Campbell) on the life of Muhammad
as seen through Muslim and non-Muslim depictions of his life, focusing on the
historiographic issues suggested by the various portraits, whether
hagiographical, defamatory, scholarly or lay.

  
  

**SCHEDULED COURSE OFFERINGS FOR 2002-2003**

  
  

****World Religions

Islamic Modernism and Fundamentalism

Sufism and Islamic Mysticism

Religion and Politics in the Middle East

  
  

****

  
  
  
  

******SELECTED ARABIC TEACHING EXPERIENCE**

  
  

**Arabic Instructor,** 6/1999 - 8/1999

School of Arabic, Middlebury College

Lead instructor in first-year Arabic course. Had full responsibility, in a
team-teaching situation, for planning and implementing the course, designing
the syllabus, teaching all the language skills, designing and grading
examinations, creating new material to supplement the textbooks, selecting
reading and listening texts, assisting students in their written and oral
presentations, and assigning final grades.

  
  

**Arabic Instructor,** 1/1999 - 6/1999

University of California, Santa Barbara

Taught second-year Arabic course. Had full responsibility for planning and
teaching the course, designing the syllabus, composing and grading the
examinations, assigning and correcting the homework, guiding students in
written and oral projects, and assigning final grades.

  
  

******Arabic Instructor** , 6/1998 - 8/1998

School of Arabic, Middlebury College

Taught first-year Arabic. Was responsible, along with other teachers, for
planning the course, taught all aspects of the first-year curriculum, designed
and graded examinations, and assigned final grades.

  
  

**SCHOLARLY PUBLICATIONS**

  
  

"The Coptic Community," co-authored with Juan Campo, forthcoming in _Global
Religions: a Handbook_ , by Oxford Press. __

  
  

"Islamization in Medieval Egypt: The Copto-Arabic "Apocalypse of Samuel" as a
Source for the Social and Religious History of Medieval Copts," _Medieval
Encounters_ , 4.3 (November, 1998)

  
  

Review of Arnoud Vrolijk's Bringing a Laugh to a Scowling Face: A Study and
Critical Edition of `Ali Ibn Sudun's "Nuzhat al-Nufus wa Mudhik al-`Abus by
`Ali Ibn Sudun al-Basbughawi (Cairo 810/1407 - Damascus 868/1464) (Leiden:
CNWS Publications, volume 70, 1998.) _Religious Studies Review_ , October,
2000.

  
  

"Bakshish," "al-Aql," and "Print," in The Oxford Dictionary of Islam, edited
by John Esposito. Forthcoming

  
  

****"Saints or Charlatans: the Social Construction of Sanctity in Contemporary
Egypt," Dissertation, University of California, Santa Barbara, Summer, 2001

CONFERENCE PRESENTATIONS AND LECTURES

  
  

"Re-dating the Apocalypse of Pseudo-Samuel: New data on Islamization and
Arabization of the Medieval Coptic Community," _Middle East Studies
Association Conference_ , Providence, RI, 1996

  
  

"Devout Heretics: The Barghawata in History and Historiography," _Middle East
Studies Association Conference_ , San Francisco, CA, 1997

  
  

"Interpreting the Barghawata: Twentieth Century Scholarship on a Medieval
Religious Polity," _Jusur Conference_ , Los Angeles, 1998

  
  

"The Sanction of Sacred Evidence: Miracles in the Lives of the Early Muslims,"
_Middle East Studies Association Conference_ , Washington, D.C., 1999

  
  

"Money, a Moulid, and the Making of a Saint: The Contended Legacy of Sheikh
Shaarawi," invited lecture at _the Netherlands-Flemish Institute_ , 2000

  
  

"The Making of a Saint in Contemporary Egypt: a Report from the Field,"
Lecture given at the colloquium of the Center for the Study of Religion,
_UCLA_ , 2001

  
  

**POPULAR PUBLICATIONS**

  
  

****"The Making of a Saint," [Sheikh Sha`rawi] _Cairo Times_ , 4.19 (13-19
July 2000)

  
  

"Restoration Hang-ups," [The Hanging Church] _Cairo Times_ , 4.20 (20-26 July
2000)

  
  

"State vs. the Sheikha," [Sheikha Manal] _Cairo Times_ , 4.21 (27 July - 9
August 2000)

  
  

"A Day in the Life of a Volunteer Muezzin," _Cairo Times_ , 4.22 (10-16 August
2000)

  
  

"Here Today, Gone Tomorrow," [Marian Apparition in Southern Egypt] _Cairo
Times_ , 4.31 (12-18 October 2000)

  
  

"The Odd Orientalist," [Goldziher Commemorated] _Cairo Times_ , 4.31 (12-18
October 2000)

  
  

******PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE**

  
  

**Program Coordinator, Development Studies,** 10/1994 - 6/1995 University of
California, Los Angeles

Administered a small undergraduate interdisciplinary major, organized student
association and activities, advised and assisted students regarding program
requirements, helped students formulate career plans, and recruited new
students.

  
  

**Public Investigator, Office for Civil Rights,** 3/1992 - 9/1992 ****

US Department of Education, San Francisco

Worked to enforce federal civil rights codes in California school districts.
Investigated specific complaints of abuse, conducted on-site examinations of
the concerned schools and districts, attempted to resolve matters amicably in
order to bring districts into compliance with US law.

  
  

**ACADEMIC AND COMMUNITY SERVICE**

  
  

Undergraduate Advisor, _University of California, Santa Barbara_ : 1998-1999

Advised a group of freshman on academic probation for failing to meet the
university's academic standards. Met with students individually and in groups,
to provide them with motivation, specific techniques for improving their
performance, and individual attention.

Volunteer Collector of Oral and Visual Historical Materials, _Shades of L.A.:
The Oral and Visual History of Ethnic Communities in Los Angeles_ , Los
Angeles Public Library, 1995.

  
  

General Editor, _Jusur_ , UCLA's Journal for Middle Eastern Studies, 1994 -
1996

  
  

**LANGUAGES**

  
  

Arabic, French, German, Spanish  
  
* * *  
  
Revised 3/7/2002

