** History 169/Political Science 169/Jewish Studies 169  
Emory University, Fall 2000  
History, Politics, and Diplomacy of the Arab-Israeli Conflict  
GENERAL COURSE INFORMATION**

**Dr. Kenneth W. Stein**

** Office: 121 Bowden Hall, 404-727-4472**

** **

**Lecture: M-W-F, 10:40-11:30, White Hall 205Discussion: M-W-F, 11:45-12:35,
White Hall 110**

**Office hours** are Monday and Wednesday, 9:00-10:00 a.m., or by appointment.
For an appointment, always try e-mail first,  kstein@emory.edu or call 7-4472.
E-mail is preferred over Learnlink. **  
  
Course description** : This course is an introductory survey to the history,
politics, and diplomacy of the Arab-Israeli conflict. The first half of the
course will deal with the historical origins and development of the conflict
to the establishment of Israel in May 1948. The second half will focus on more
recent political, social and economic aspects of the conflict, including the
evolution of Palestinian national identity, the 1956, 1967 and 1973 Middle
East Wars, and the various diplomatic efforts aimed at resolving the conflict.
Reading and analyzing documents related to the conflict's 100-year history is
a central feature of the course. **Note** : Students who have taken History
369 or 370, or equivalent courses on the Arab-Israeli conflict at another
university or institution, may not enroll in this course unless granted
written permission by the instructor.



**Readings** : Documents book, selected readings on reserve, and purchased
paperback books. The Stein/Lewis monograph noted below is not available at the
bookstore; it will be provided to you without charge. Specially prepared for
this course, the documents book will be distributed by the instructor to you
for a cost of $30.00. Cash or checks payable to the Middle East Research
Program.



Bickerton, Ian, and Carla Klausner, _A Concise History of the Arab-Israeli
Conflict_ , (Prentice Hall, 3rd edition, 1998).



Smith, Charles D., _Palestine and the Arab-Israeli Conflict_ , (St. Martin's,
3rd edition, 1996).



Stein, Kenneth W., _Heroic Diplomacy: Sadat, Kissinger, Carter, Begin and the
Quest for Arab-Israeli Peace_ , (Routledge, 1999).



Stein, Kenneth W., and Samuel W. Lewis, _Making Peace Among Arabs and
Israelis: Lessons from Fifty Years of Negotiating Experience_ , (Washington,
D.C., 1991). (To be handed out)



**Grading** : midterm (30%), discussion (20%), and final (50%).

**Examinations** will be given as follows: The mid-term examination will be
given on Wednesday, October 18, 2000, from 10:40-11:30 a.m., and the final
examination will be given on Thursday, December 14, 2000, from 8:30-11:00 a.m.

  

Please note that no make-up examinations will be scheduled for the mid-term or
the final. For the mid-term examination, please bring one large blue
examination book. For the final, please bring two large blue examination
books. Do not write on or in the blue books prior to either examination. If
you wish to have either your final grade or final examination paper mailed to
you, please provide a self-addressed stamped envelope or postcard when you
return your final. Be sure the postage is correct.

Examination books not returned by mail will remain in a box in front of my
office for your collection until January 20, 2001\. After that date, remaining
examination books will be discarded.



**General guidelines for class activities and scheduling** : There will be
three class lectures and one discussion section for each student per week.
Attendance will be taken at discussion sections. You are encouraged to take a
good set of lecture notes. To prepare for your examinations, integrate your
notes with your assigned readings, discussion section remarks, and the
documents. The purpose of the discussion sections is to review carefully the
reading assignments, lecture notes, and documents covered weekly. Discussion
sections are not meant to be merely question and answersessions; they are
meant to elicit discussion and encourage opinion about the historical
documents which are central to the course's content.

Please bring the Bickerton and Klausner book to every lecture and discussion
class. Be sure to bring the Documents book to each discussion section. All
articles marked * are at the reserve desk at Woodruff and are on a two-hour
reserve use basis.

  

**History 169/Political Science 169/Jewish Studies 169Emory University, Fall
2000History, Politics, and Diplomacy of the Arab-Israeli Conflict COURSE
SYLLABUS**



**September 1 and Week of September 3- Origins of the Conflict, Zionism, and
Arab Nationalism in**

**Pre- and Post-World War I**

**September 1** , course introduction and syllabus discussion

**September 4** , no classes, Labor Day

**S** **eptember 6** , lecture only

**September 8** , lecture only

**Readings** :

B&K, pp. 1-43; and Smith, pp. 1-67.

*Mandel, Neville J., "Ottoman Policy and Restrictions on Jewish Settlement in Palestine: 1881-1908--Part I," _Middle Eastern Studies_ , October 1974, pp. 312-332.



**Week of September 10 - The Palestine Mandate, 1920-1948 (I)**

**September 11** , lecture only

**September 13** , lecture only

**September 15** , _Walls of Jerusalem_ (90-minute movie), only

**Readings** :

B&K, pp. 43-66; and Smith, pp. 68-111.

*Horowitz, Dan, and Moshe Lissak, "Ideology and Politics in the Yishuv," _The Jerusalem Quarterly_ , Winter 1977, pp. 12-26.

*Kolatt, Israel, "The Organization of the Jewish Population of Palestine and the Development of its Political Consciousness Before World War I," _Studies in Palestine During the Ottoman Period_ , (Jerusalem: Magnes Press, 1975), pp. 211-245.

*Mattar, Philip, "The Mufti of Jerusalem and the Politics of Palestine," _Middle East Journal_ , Vol. 42, No. 2, Spring 1988, pp. 227-240.

*Nashif, Taysir, "Palestinian Arab and Jewish Leadership in the Mandate Period," _Journal of Palestine Studies_ , Vol. 6, 1977, pp. 113-121.

*Porath, Yehoshua, "The Palestinian-Arab Nationalist Movement," _Palestinian Arab Nationalism_ , 1975, pp. 121-127.



**Week of September 17 - The Palestine Mandate, 1920-1948 (II)**

**September 18** , lecture and discussion

**September 20** , lecture and discussion

**September 22** , lecture and discussion

**Readings:**

B&K, pp. 67-114;

Smith, pp. 112-151.

*Shapira, Anita, AConclusion: The Birth of the State,@ _Land and Power: The Zionist Resort to Force, 1881-1948_ , (Oxford University Press, 1992), pp. 353-370 and 414-415.

*Stein, Kenneth W., "Palestine's Rural Economy, 1917-1939," _Studies in Zionism_ , Vol. 8, No. 1, 1987, pp. 25-49. ****



**Week of September 24 - The End of the Mandate, Armistice Negotiations,
Israeli Nation-Building, and Emergence of the Palestinian Arab National
Movement**

**September 25** , lecture and discussion

**September 27** , lecture and discussion

**September 29** , lecture and discussion

**Readings:**

Smith, pp. 152-177.

*Khalaf, Issa, "The Reasons for the Disintegration of Palestinian Society with an Emphasis on the Persistence of Factionalism," _Politics in Palestine_ , (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1991), pp. 231-248.

*Kolatt, Israel, "The Zionist Movement and the Arabs," _Studies in Zionism_ , April 1982, pp. 129-157.

*Morris, Benny, "Origins of the Palestinian Refugee Problem," in Laurence J. Silberstein (ed.), _New Perspectives on Jewish Studies_ , (New York: New York University Press, 1991), pp. 42-56.



**Week of October 1 - Great Power Interests in the Middle East; the Cold War,
the Suez War, and the June 1967 War**

**October 2** , lecture and discussion

**October 4** , lecture and discussion

**October 6** , lecture and discussion

**Readings** :

B&K, pp. 115-160;

and Smith, pp. 178-205.

*Safran, Nadav, "America's Israel Connection," _The Jerusalem Quarterly_ , Summer 1977, pp. 3-30.

*Rabinovich, Itamar, "The Suez-Sinai Campaign: The Regional Dimension, " in S. I. Troen and M. Shemesh (eds.), _The Suez-Sinai Crisis, 1956: Retrospective and Reappraisal_ , (New York: Columbia University Press), pp.162-171. ****

** **

**Week of October 8 - Attempted and Failed Diplomacy, 1967-1973**

**October 9** , no class, Yom Kippur

**October 11** , lecture only

**October 13** , lecture only ****

****

**Readings** :

B&K, pp. 161-173;

Smith, pp. 206-226;

and Stein, _Heroic Diplomacy_ , pp. 1-73.

*Ajami, Fouad, "The End of Pan-Arabism," _Foreign Affairs_ , Winter 1978-1979, pp. 355-373.



**Week of October 15 - The October 1973 War**

**October 16** , no class, fall break

**October 18** , mid-term examination (Please bring one large unmarked blue
book)

**October 20** , lecture only

**Readings** :

Stein, _Heroic Diplomacy_ , pp. 74-96;

Stein and Lewis, _Making Peace_ , pp. 1-8.



**Week of October 22 - From the October 1973 War to the Carter Administration:
Kissinger's Diplomatic Openings**

**October 23** , lecture and discussion

**October 25** , lecture and discussion

**October 27** , lecture and discussion

**Readings** :

B&K, pp. 173-197;

Smith, pp. 226- 241;

Stein, _Heroic Diplomacy_ , pp. 97-186.

**Week of October 29 \- The Carter Administration's Comprehensive Goals Lead
to a Separate Egyptian** **Peace: How and Why?  
********     October 30**, lecture and discussion  
     **November 1** , lecture and discussion **  
    November 3**, lecture and discussion

[Note: This is the Friday before parents= weekend; parents are cordially
invited to attend class and/or the discussion section, even if Friday is not
your regular discussion day.]  
**Readings** :  
B & K, pp. 197-212;  
Smith, pp. 242-259;  
Stein, _Heroic Diplomacy_ , pp. 187-228. ****

**Week of November 5 - The 1980s: The Decade of Not Getting Together: Reagan-
Shultz, Shamir, Assad, Hussein, and Arafat; Lebanon and the Intifadah**

**November 6** , lecture and discussion

**November 8** , lecture and discussion

**November 10** , lecture and discussion

**Readings** :

B&K, 213-247;

Smith, pp. 259-308.

*Garfinkle, Adam, "Getting it Right? U.S. Middle East Policy in Bush Administration," _The Jerusalem Quarterly_ , Fall 1989, pp. 55-78. ****

**  
**

**Week of November 12 - Shaping a Productive Negotiating Environment: The Gulf
War, The Madrid Peace Conference, Bi-lateral and Multi-lateral Talks**

**November 13** , Special lecture and discussion, Former 39th President of the
United States, President Jimmy Carter, ARecollections of Camp David.@

_[Please note that the class will begin as usual, however, President Carter
will join it in progress; he will remain with us through 12:30 p.m. There will
be no discussion section today. If you have class scheduled for 11:45 to 12:30
p.m. on Wednesdays, seek an excuse from your teacher to remain in our class.]_

**November 15** , lecture, no discussion

**November 17** , Dr. Marwan Muasher, Ambassador of Jordan to the United
States, AJordan=s National and Regional Priorities after the Arab-Israeli
Conflict.@

**Readings** :

B&K, pp. 248-258;

Smith, pp. 308-317;

Stein, _Heroic Diplomacy_ , pp. 229-268.

*Horowitz, Dan, AThe Israeli Concept of National Security,@ in A. Yaniv (ed.), _National Security and Democracy in Israel_ , (Boulder, 1993), pp. 11-53. 

*Indyk, Martin, "Peace Without the PLO," _Foreign Policy_ , Summer 1991, pp. 30-38. ****

** **

**Weeks of November 19 - PLO-Israeli Reconciliation, 1988-2000: Oslo I, Oslo
II, and Beyond**

**     November 20**, lecture and discussion **  
    November 22**, lecture, no discussion **  
    November 24**, no lecture, Thanksgiving break

**Readings:**

B&K, pp. 259-282;

Smith, pp. 317-341;

Stein and Lewis, pp. 8-39.

*Garfinkle, Adam, "Israel and Palestine: A Precarious Partnership," _The Washington Quarterly_ , Summer 1997, pp. 3-22. ****



**Week of November 26 - The Jordanian-Israeli Peace Treaty, The Syrian-Israeli
Track, and Egyptian-Israeli Relations**

**November 27** , lecture and discussion

**November 29** , lecture and discussion

**December 1** , lecture and discussion

**Readings** :

B&K, pp. 283-320.

*Salame, Ghassan, "Inter-Arab Politics: Return of Geography," in William B. Quandt (ed.), _The Middle East, Ten Years After Camp David_ , 1988, pp. 319-353.

*Stein, Kenneth, "Continuity and Change in Egyptian-Israeli Relations, 1973-1997," _Israel Affairs_ , Spring/Summer 1997, pp. 296-320. ****

** **

**Week of December 3 - Camp David II and the Palestinian-Israeli Negotiations,
2000**

****

**December 4** , lecture and discussion

**December 6** , lecture and discussion

**December 8** , lecture and discussion

**Readings** : B&K, pp. 315-320.



**Week of December 10 - The Middle East Without an Arab-Israeli Conflict **

**December 11** , lecture only



**Thursday, December 14 - Final Examination** , 8:30-11:00 a.m. in room 205
White Hall. Bring two large and unmarked blue books.

