

![History 101](_derived/Skeens%20History_101.htm_cmp_indust010_bnr.gif)

  
  
---  
  


[![Home](_derived/home_cmp_indust010_hbtn.gif)](./)



| | **

Course Syllabus

History 101 - Western Civilization

Fall Semester, 2000

**_



_**

Instructor:** Col. E. G. Skeens

**

Office:** Room 202A North Bassett Hall

**

Phone:** Ext. 4402. From off campus: 365-4402

**

Office Hours:** W 9:30-11:00; 13:00-14:30

                        TTh 14:00-15:30

                        _Or by appointment_



**

Class Hours:** TTh - 11:00 W. Civ. 101

                    TTh - 12:30 Civil War 305



_



_**

Required Course Materials:

**

Textbook: _Western Civilization - A Brief History_ \- Jackson J. Spielvogel -
Wadsworth Publishing Company. aka - Text

                       Collateral Reading:

_                        Civilization Primer:_ Edward M. Anson. aka - CP

**

Course Objectives:** To have a familiarity with the major historical
personalities, political, cultural, intellectual, and military events and
trends, from the Ancient Greeks to the Protestant Reformation, which have
influenced our modern society.

**

Course Requirements:

**

1\. _Regular class attendance_ : See attached sheet: Explanation of absences,
latenesses, and penalties.

2\. Reading of all assigned materials.

3\. Successful completion of quizzes and major tests.

**

Extra Credit:

**

1\. There may be an opportunity to get extra credit by attending certain
college events such as lectures, videotapes, and events which relate to our
course. These will be announced in class.

2\. _Research/Term Paper_ \- Extra credit will be given for a research paper.
The subject of the paper must be approved by the professor no later than
Thursday, October 20, and the guidelines found on the instructions given to
you when you decide to do a term paper must be followed carefully. The paper
is due not later than _Thursday, November 30_ and any paper after that date
will not be accepted. _This paper is optional_!

**

Irregular Class Hours:

**

On occasion, it may be necessary to either cancel or meet class at a time and
place other than regularly scheduled. If this does occur, you will be notified
as soon as possible.





**

NOTE: Leaving a message on voice mail or any electronic failure on assignments
(ie, computer malfunction) does not excuse you from any pending class
responsibilities.

The _only_ legitimate reason for missing a test is verifiable illness or
emergency.

****

Topic / Subject / Assignment / Activity

** **

NOTE:** Please see _Annex A_ \- Adjunct Collateral Reading Assignment Sheet
for assignments.

All Assignments below are from the text: _Western Civilization, A Brief
History_ , Spielvogel

**

Topic #1** Prehistory and the Beginning of Ancient Civilization (Read Ch. 1
and 2)

**

Topic #2** The Civilization of Ancient Greece (Text: Chapters 3 & 4)

Subject: - Early Aegean Civilizations (Ch. 3, p. 44-48)

\- The Polis: Sparta & Athens (Ch. 3, p. 48-54)

\- The Persian Wars (Ch. 3, p. 54-55)

\- The Golden Age of Athens (Ch. 3, p. 55-65)

\- The Peloponnesian War (Ch. 3, p. 55-63)

\- The Macedonian Conquest (Ch. 4, p. 68-69)

\- Alexander & the Hellenistic Age (Ch. 4, p. 69-82)

\- Major Test #1 (All previous assignments & lectures)

**

Topic #3** Rome - From City-State to World Empire (Text: Chapters 5 & 6)

Subject: - The Beginnings: Italy; Mythology and the Etruscan Kingdom (Ch. 5,
p. 84-86)

\- The Rise of the Republic (Ch. 5, p. 87-88)

\- Roman Expansion & Unity of Italy (Ch. 5, p. 86-89)

\- The Punic War & World Power (Ch. 5, p. 90-98)

\- Civil War and Collapse of the Republic (Ch. 5, p. 99-102)

\- Augustus - The Foundation of Roman Empire (Ch. 6, p. 106-118

\- Period of Decline (Ch. 6, p. 123-125)

\- The Fall of the Roman Empire (Ch. 6, p. 125-126)

\- The Legacy of Rome (Ch. 6, p. 127)

\- Major Test #2 (All previous materials & lectures since Test #1)

**

Topic #4** From the Dark Ages to the Reformation (Text: Chapters
7,8,10,11,12,13)

Subject: - The Rise of Christianity (Ch. 6, p. 120-121; Ch 7, p. 136-143)

\- The Byzantine Empire / The Rise of Islam (Ch. 7, p. 144-153)

\- Western Europe & the Dark Ages (Ch. 8, p. 154-164)

\- The Rise of Feudalism (Ch. 8, p. 164-167)

\- Anglo-Saxon England / William the Conqueror (Ch. 10, p. 204-207)

\- The Crusades; Rise of Towns & Trade (Ch. 11, p. 217-222)

\- Famine, War, Plague & Results (Ch. 12, p. 236-248)

\- The Renaissance (Ch. 13, p. 256-261)

\- Major Test #3 (All previous materials & lectures since Test #2)

**

Final Test (Examination Schedule)

Time Class meets: Date & Time of Final Test:

**

11:00 TTh Wednesday, Dec. 13 - 10:30-12:30



Syllabus Annex A Fall, 2000

ADJUNCT COLLATERAL READING ASSIGNMENT SHEET



Required Readings from: _Civilization Primer_ \- Anson



_Civilization Primer_ Assignments/Quiz Dates:

Week 1: Ch. 1 - History - Thursday, Aug. 31

Week 2: Ch. 2 - Geography - Thursday, Sept. 14

Week 3: Ch. 3 - Culture - Thursday, Sept. 21

Week 4: Ch. 4 - Economics - Thursday, Sept. 28

Week 5: Ch. 5 - Government - Thursday, Oct. 5

Week 6: Ch. 6 - Beliefs - Thursday, Oct. 12

Week 7: Glossary - * _Comprehensive Quiz: Thursday, Oct. 19

_

*(not required for those with an "A" quiz average)





Syllabus Annex B

**_

Explanation_ of _Excused_ and _Unexcused Absences_ and _Lateness to Class_ and
_Penalties_ Involved _for_ these _Unexcused Infractions_.

_

Note_:** There are no penalties for _official_ absences and lateness. However,
if a student misses more than _25%_ of the scheduled class meetings (either
excused and/or unexcused), he/she will receive a failing grade for the course.
_This is a requirement of the College and its accrediting agency_.

**_

Excused Absences_** \- Any absences which result from verifiable illness;
death or serious illness in the immediate family; official college activities
(ie: athletic or academic trips); or other reasons officially excused by the
College will be excused. The excuse _must be in writing_ and presented to the
professor on the _first class after the absence_. In some cases, the professor
himself may excuse a student's absence under _special circumstances prior to
the absence_ if a request is _submitted in writing_. _In all cases of
absences_ the student will be held responsible for class materials and
assignments missed upon their immediate return to class.

**_

Penalties for Unexcused Absences_** \- No penalty will be incurred on the
first three unexcused absences. On the fourth unexcused absence, there will be
a _2 point deduction from your final semester average_. On the fifth unexcused
absence, there will be an additional 4 point deduction, the sixth an
additional 6 point deduction. Thus, six absences (3 unexcused) mean a _12
point reduction_ from the final semester average--that's a grade letter
reduction (for example from a  "C" to a "D"). _The seventh unexcused absence
will result in an automatic "F" in the course_.

**_

Penalties for Unexcused Lateness (Tardies)_:** On the first unexcused lateness
to class there will be no penalty. The second unexcused lateness _may_ result
in a 1 point penalty. All unexcused lateness to class thereafter _will_ result
in a 1 point penalty subtracted from your final average. If you _are_ late to
class, be sure to _fill out a A/CC/L Form_* and _turn it in at the end of
class_ \--it's better to be late than absent.

* A/CC/L Attendance/Cross-cut/Lateness Form



**

TO AVOID THE HOGWASH ABOVE -- JUST COME TO CLASS & BE ON TIME!

**

Syllabus Annex C:



**_

S.O.P (Smart Operating Procedure)_ or _Helpful Hints_

On Making a Decent Grade in this Class and Others Also.

**



1\. Don't miss class!! If you have a legitimate reason for missing class, try
to "cross cut" if possible.

2\. Set up a specific time for reading and studying your history, and don't
deviate from that time. There is no such thing as "I don't have any homework
or assignment." Just look at your syllabus!

3\. It is easy to get excited and push yourself to study at the beginning of a
school year. The difficulty is to keep going through the entire semester. This
is what separates the A's & B's from the D's & F's.

4\. Begin with, and maintain, a good attitude. Nobody (including this
professor) likes a grouch or a bad attitude. Try to be polite (a rarity these
days) and cheerful. You'll be surprised how much it will help. _But_ \- - -

5\. Don't try to con your way into academic success. There is no substitute
for work and study. Remember, most professors have heard about every excuse in
the book (especially an Army colonel).

6\. _Be honest_ \- in your class work and in your dealings and conversations
with others. I'll lean over backward to help anyone who is honest and having
academic difficulty. However, for someone trying to pass by cheating or lying,
courses of action will be taken to make it highly unprofitable; academically
and otherwise. Maintaining respect is far better in the long run, rather than
achieving some temporary minor success by being a liar, cheat, or fraud.

7\. Set your priorities and stick to them. Don't give in to peer pressure if
it is something you should not do, or would interfere with something you
should do. You are moving into the adult world now. _Be your own_ _person_.
_You are now carving out your entire future_. Ask any successful
businessperson, lawyer, doctor, or whatever, whether they partied instead of
studying when they should have. There is a time and a place for everything.
Keep them straight.

8\. If you begin to have difficulty or trouble (academically or otherwise) \-
- get help. There is plenty available, and it is free. But don't wait before
it is too late. One of the most irritating, yet pitiful things in college, is
for a student to come to a professor for the first time, during the last week
of the semester, and ask "Is there some extra credit work I can do to pull up
my grade?".

9\. Vary your activities. Participate in some things that interest you, other
than just academic. But don't get too involved at the expense of your academic
work. Your chances of being a professional cheerleader, athlete, or student
government officer the rest of your life are pretty slim. Remember, all work
and no play may make a dull person - - but mostly play and little work makes
for a _college flunk-out_.



Syllabus Annex D:

**

Test Guidelines and Suggestions

**

1\. Put your name, seat number, and class section (the day and time your class
regularly meets) on your test. It is also a good idea to put your name on each
sheet of your test.

2\. Number each question you are answering and each page of your test. If you
write on the back of your paper, it is sometimes difficult for the professor
to follow the proper sequence if the pages are not numbered.

3\. Read the instructions and questions on the tests very carefully, and be
sure you understand them. If you do not, ask the professor. _DO NOT_ start
answering the questions without reading and understanding the instructions.
Also, read the _entire_ question before you begin to answer it.

4\. If the answer to a question does not immediately come to mind, do not get
stalled and frustrated and waste a lot of time on it. Go to the next question,
and come back later. Answer the questions you know first, and then return to
the ones you are unsure of. This is an important rule to follow in taking
tests.

5\. Write as clearly and legibly as you can, using proper grammar and
spelling.

6\. A portion of every test in this course will have essay questions. The
following are suggestions for writing an essay:

\- Read the essay question carefully, and be sure you understand it.

\- Look for key words or phrases such as - political - economic - origin of -
significance of - etc., which will guide you in answering the question.

\- Make a brief outline of the key points you want to make.

\- Be able to tell where, when, who, what, why, and significance, (i.e.,
importance in history).

\- Write clearly, legibly, using proper grammar and spelling.

\- Be precise and concise. Don't use a lot of unrelated words or phrases just
to fill space. Leave the "bull" to the matadors. Yet, write enough to fully
answer the question.

7\. _Most Importantly!!_ Do not put off reading and studying for the test
until the night before the test. Pulling an  "all-nighter" is dumb. People
that do generally are so tired when they take the test, they forget most of
what they studied. Taking stimulants has proved even more stupid. Begin
reviewing well before the scheduled test.

8\. _DO YOUR OWN WORK!!_ Most people, myself in particular, have no respect
for someone who is dishonest or cheats. If I am aware, or made aware, of
someone who has cheated in any way, serious consequences _WILL_ occur, one way
or another!



Student Information and Certification Form



Official Name:
________________________________________________________________

Name you are called by: _____________________________ DOB:
____________________

Hometown: ___________________________________________________________________

School you last attended:
________________________________________________________

Your projected major (write none if undecided):
_____________________________________

Circle your class: Freshman Sophomore Junior Senior

**

Extra Curricular Activities** List activities which on occasion may cause an
official class absence (Ex. varsity athletic teams; Jack Tales; Choir; etc.):

















To your knowledge do you have any physical/learning disabilities which may
affect your work in this class? (Note: A verifiable learning disability,
dyslexia for example, should be reported to the ARC where they can set up a
program to help you in this and your other classes.) Yes No Unsure







I certify that I have read and understand the attendance/lateness and other
regulations of this class as explained in the syllabus and/or by the
professor.





___________________________________

Signature

____________________________________

Date



ATTENDANCE / CROSS CUT / LATENESS FORM



Date: ______________________________

**

Category**. Please check one:

__________ Excused Absence

__________ Cross Cut

__________ Lateness (Tardy)





Name: _______________________________________________ Seat # ________________

Class subject: ____________________________________________

Hour/days of your regular class: __________________________________

Hour/date/day of missed/late class: ___________________________________

If you were late and had a legitimate reason, please explain.

















If you plan to miss a class, please write the date and time you plan to miss
and the legitimate/excused reason for your planned absence.

  
---|---|---  
  


    [ [Home](./) ] [ [Up](syllabi.htm) ]

#####  Last modified: April 19, 2001  
  
---

