  | ![Welcome to the College of Liberal Arts web
site](../../images/banner/public_banner_2.gif) | [![University of
Minnesota](../../images/banner/public_banner_3.gif)](http://www.umn.edu) |  |

[U of M Twin Cities Campus](http://www1.umn.edu/twincities/) | [U of M
Search](http://search.umn.edu/)  
  
---  
  | ![College of Liberal Arts](../../images/banner/public_banner_5.gif) |
![CLA Today, a magazine for alumni, faculty, staff and friends of the
college](../../images/banner/cla_today_winter02.gif)  
  
[CLA home](../../default.html) | [CLA Today home](../default.html) | [winter
2001-2002 home](default.html)  
  
---  
  
# Beyond Words @ Images, CLA people reflect on September 11  
  
---  
  
page 1 | [page 2](beyond2.htm) | [page 3](beyond3.htm)  
  
---  
  
Text by Karin Winegar  
Photos by Diana Watters  
  
Above a rustle of journals and notebooks, students in baseball hats and ski
caps, turbans and headsets fill every seat, spill out onto the stairs, and
pack the rear of the Cowles Auditorium. They are here for a lively open forum
featuring seven historians, who will offer perspectives on September 11.

![photo of grafitti on Folwell Hall,
](../../images/clatoday/AR2001/special_report/graffiti.jpg)

In the words of University history department chair [David
Good](http://fmdb.cla.umn.edu/clafacexpertise/FMPro?-db=cla%5ffac%5fexpertise.fp5&-format=record%5fdetail.htm&-lay=web&-sortfield=t%5fname%5fl&-sortfield=t%5fname%5ff&-op=cn&c%5fname%5fsearch=David%20Good&-max=10&-recid=32877&-find=),
they are here "not to debate to but to take the long view." Over the next
three hours, the panelists will take the audience on a guided tour across a
broad sweep of history and culture.

Great towers have collapsed, thousands have died, and our world has undergone
a tectonic shift. And in classrooms and studios, conversations and forums, the
College of Liberal Arts is doing what it does best and has done for more than
a century: It is mobilizing its considerable intellectual resources-its
faculty's vast knowledge of history, world politics, and human cultures and
societies-to help people make sense of a changing world.

Whether the subject is Islam, the Taliban, the political and psychological
roots of terrorism, the global economy, immigration, Middle East history,
media coverage, or the role of artists and intellectuals in wartime, people
throughout the College of Liberal Arts (CLA) are rethinking what they know and
thought they knew.

Members of the faculty are revisiting their own research while leading their
students into an uncertain future and sharing their expertise with the
community.

Meanwhile, a new urgency sparks students' attention. Students are asking
questions they've never even imagined before, probing their own understanding
of historical events, trying to figure out what to make of something that
seems, on the face of it, unfathomable.

![photo of professor Lisa
Disch](../../images/clatoday/AR2001/special_report/Disch.jpg)

## What's past is prologue

An academic community working together can turn a calamity into a significant
teaching opportunity, says political science professor [Lisa
Disch](http://fmdb.cla.umn.edu/clafacexpertise/FMPro?-db=cla%5ffac%5fexpertise.fp5&-format=record%5fdetail.htm&-lay=web&-sortfield=t%5fname%5fl&-sortfield=t%5fname%5ff&-op=cn&c%5fname%5fsearch=Lisa%20Disch&-max=10&-recid=32976&-find=),
noting the month-long series of teach-ins created by geography graduate
students.

"The students organized virtually a short course on Middle Eastern politics
and the U.S. response to September 11," she says. "They pulled together an
interdisciplinary group of scholars and had audiences in the hundreds. It was
phenomenal, and a model testimony of the kind of things the U can do at a time
like this."

![photo of professor Iraj
Bashiri](../../images/clatoday/AR2001/special_report/Bashiri.jpg)

One of those scholars was [Iraj
Bashiri](http://fmdb.cla.umn.edu/clafacexpertise/FMPro?-db=cla%5ffac%5fexpertise.fp5&-format=record%5fdetail.htm&-lay=web&-sortfield=t%5fname%5fl&-sortfield=t%5fname%5ff&-op=cn&c%5fname%5fsearch=Iraj%20Bashiri&-max=10&-recid=33150&-find=),
professor in the Institute of Linguistics, English as a Second Language, and
Slavic Languages and Literatures. A native of Iran, Bashiri travels
extensively in central Asia to update his understanding of the area. These
days, he says, his students ask questions they've never asked before. And his
colleagues more often turn to him as a resource. "They ask me questions about
linguistics, about the political backgrounds of Afghanis and Tajiks," he says.
"People we never talked about before are centers of conversation."

Bashiri turns this thirst for knowledge into history lessons. "In my teaching,
I demonstrate the correspondences I see between what happened and what history
shows us," he says-"for example, the Mongol invasion that devastated Europe
and Central Asia, an invasion nobody expected: in a way, that was their
September 11. [September 11] took only minutes, but the colossal amount of
damage and destruction of life and property were much like a modern version of
that medieval event."

## How do we live now?

![photo of professor Mary
Dietz](../../images/clatoday/AR2001/special_report/Dietz.jpg)

Plato, Aristotle, and Thucydides had more in common with Ground Zero than the
students in [Mary
Dietz](http://fmdb.cla.umn.edu/clafacexpertise/FMPro?-db=cla%5ffac%5fexpertise.fp5&-format=record%5fdetail.htm&-lay=web&-sortfield=t%5fname%5fl&-sortfield=t%5fname%5ff&-op=cn&c%5fname%5fsearch=Mary%20Dietz&-max=10&-recid=32975&-find=)'s
classes had suspected. Dietz, who teaches political theory and philosophy and
history of Western political thought, naturally raises questions about the
relationship between empire and democracy, power and justice, necessity and
choice.

On that Tuesday morning, these issues became painfully palpable.

"I was teaching Thucydides' Peloponnesian War, and I didn't have to set aside
a day to deal with the attacks or muster on with the syllabus," says Dietz.
"The trauma was there in the subject matter, and the events underscored the
seriousness and monumentality of those themes."

Like Bashiri, Dietz began to get questions that she'd never heard before in
her classes. "There is an existential shift, a certain kind of angst that
captured everyone's soul and imaginations," says Dietz. And, she adds, the
University is a vital center "for wonderers to talk, reflect, and deliberate.

"Political theory and ancient Greek political thought are palliative,
restorative, and a challenge. They help us answer the question, how do we live
now? The challenge is now to sort through what it means to persevere in the
face of frightening possibilities in an upended world."

## Anticipation and response

Fuchsia characters gliding across [Abdi
Samatar](http://fmdb.cla.umn.edu/clafacexpertise/FMPro?-db=cla%5ffac%5fexpertise.fp5&-format=record%5fdetail.htm&-lay=web&-sortfield=t%5fname%5fl&-sortfield=t%5fname%5ff&-op=cn&c%5fname%5fsearch=Abdi%20Samatar&-max=10&-recid=32844&-find=)'s
computer screen declare "Salaam Alaykum" (peace be with you). To the East
Africa-born geography professor, the U is "an island where ideas can be born,
and minds opened, and we can sustain higher levels of inquiry." Heightened
awareness of the Middle East has moved the U.S. residents of this academic
island "to question our way of life vis-a-vis [Middle Easterners'] and ask how
they can meet."

![photo of professor Abdi
Samatar](../../images/clatoday/AR2001/special_report/Samatar.jpg)

Since September 11 opened up a crack in our world, students have been looking
through and beyond the breach for a broader understanding of events. Indeed, a
new educational dynamic has emerged that Samatar believes may also reshape the
University. "September 11 is an avenue to raise epic questions," he says-
questions that are not local but global, not just about September 11 but about
the whole of history.

Like Samatar, [Caesar
Farah](http://fmdb.cla.umn.edu/clafacexpertise/FMPro?-db=cla%5ffac%5fexpertise.fp5&-format=record%5fdetail.htm&-lay=web&-sortfield=t%5fname%5fl&-sortfield=t%5fname%5ff&-op=cn&c%5fname%5fsearch=Caesar%20Farah&-max=10&-recid=81&-find=),
professor of Middle Eastern and Islamic history, has infused his course on
Islam with current events, providing cultural and political perspectives from
sources "unfiltered by U.S. media," such as the BBC and AL-Jazeera TV, based
in Qatar.

In times such as these, says Farah, the implications of such multi-faceted
knowledge are practical as well as theoretical. They help us understand why
September 11 happened and how we should respond. The once-remote history and
culture of Islam and the Arab world suddenly have real weight for U.S.
students, who have been yanked into a drama where many of the same historical
forces and issues are being played out-this time hitting home, on U.S. soil.  
  
[next page](beyond2.htm)  
  
![end of page content](../../admin/images/footer_bar_650.gif)  
---  
  
[College of Liberal Arts](../../default.html) \- [University of Minnesota Twin
Cities Campus](http://www1.umn.edu/twincities/)  
Send correspondance regarding CLA Today to the editor at
[claext@cla.umn.edu](mailto:claext@cla.umn.edu)  
Send comments and suggestions about the CLA website to [cla-
web@cla.umn.edu](mailto:cla-web@cla.umn.edu).  
The University of Minnesota is an equal opportunity educator and employer.  
(C) 2002 by the Regents of the University of Minnesota.  
University of Minnesota Online [Privacy
Statement](http://www.privacy.umn.edu/)

