**Literature 331: World Literature II**

**Europe; Asia; Africa and the Middle East**

**Instructor**

Professor Norbert Elliot

**Course Description**

This course offers students an opportunity to enhance their understanding of
contemporary global interactions by exploring a diverse array of culturally
expressive artifacts---novels, short stories, and poems--grouped
geographically by region. Course readings represent the following regions:
Europe, Asia, and Africa and the Middle East. A second course, Literature 330,
covers the literature of North America, Latin America and the Caribbean, and
Australia and Oceania.

**Prerequisites**

The Writing, Speaking, and Thinking Curriculum: Three credits of English are
required.

The Basic Social Science Curriculum: Six credits of basic social science are
recommended.

The Cultural History Curriculum: Six credits of cultural history are required.

**Texts**

Anthology:  
Norman A. Spenser and Shirley Geok-Lin Lim. _One World of Literature_. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 1993.

Novels:  
Graham Greene. _The End of the Affair_. 1951. New York: Penguin, 1999.

Chinua Achebe. _Things Fall Apart_. 1959. New York: Doubleday, 1994.

Handbook:  
Sylvan Barnet. _A Short Guide to Writing about Literature_. 8th ed. New York:
Longman, 2000.  
  
Films (to rent):  
_The End of the Affair_ (1999)  
_Raise the Red Lantern_ (1991)

**CD ROM**

Norbert Elliot. _Literature 331_. Newark: NJIT, 2001.

**The Portfolio**

Copies of all assignments-drafts and final copies of papers, slides from oral
presentations, and examinations-will be kept by each student in a portfolio
retained by the instructor at the end of the course. This document will
reflect the overall quality of your work.

**Late Assignments**

Late assignments are not accepted and will receive a failing grade unless
prior arrangements are made. If there is an emergency, I may be reached at
either my office or by e-mail.

**Assignments**  

There are four types of assignments in the course:

1\. Responses to Lectures 1-20 and the accompanying readings, worth 2 points
each (total: 40 pts.)  
2\. Review of web sites for literature of the three geographic areas, worth 3
points each (total: 9 pts.)  
3\. Four essays, worth 10 points each (total: 40 pts.)  
4\. One group project, worth 11 points total: 11 pts.)  

The final grade will be based on your cumulative effort in the course; that
is, your grade will be based on your improvement, not solely on a sum of
grades.

**Syllabus (This is a sample syllabus. While the basic elements of the course
remain consistent across semesters, elements of the course change. For
distance learning courses, the final syllabus is provided on the web site. For
traditional classes, the final syllabus is provided the first day of class.)**

_Part 1: Literature in a Global Context_

Week 1

Topic: An Introduction to World Literature  
Listen to Lecture 1: An Introduction to World Literature. Barnet, Chapter 5,
"What is  
Literature?" Barnet, Chapter 6, "What is Interpretation?" Barnet, Chapter
7,"What  
is Evaluation?" Barnet, Chapter 14, "Style and Format" Barnet, Chapter 15,  
"Writing a Research Paper" Barnet, Chapter 16, "New Approaches to the  
Research Paper: Literature, History, and the World Wide Web" Lim and Spenser,  
"Documentation" Lim and Spenser, "The Question of Translation" Begin Graham  
Greene, The End of the Affair  
Assignments  
Assignment 1 : A Cultural Autobiography due February 2 (10 points)  

_Part 2: The Literature of Europe_

Week 2

Listen to Lecture 2: Writing About World Literature. Listen to Lecture 3: The  
Literature of Europe. Read Barnet, Chapter 1, "The Writer as Reader: Reading  
and Responding" Barnet, Chapter 2, "The Reader as Writer: Drafting and
Writing"  
Barnet, Chapter 3, "Two Forms of Criticism: Explication and Analysis" Barnet,  
Chapter 8 "Writing About Literature: An Overview" Barnet, Chapter 9, "Writing  
About Fiction" Lim and Spenser, "A Note on Fiction." D. H. Lawrence, "The
Horse  
Dealer's Daughter." Virginia Woolf, "The Mark on the Wall." James Joyce,
"Araby."  
Continue reading Graham Greene, The End of the Affair Franz Kafka, "A Hunger  
Artist." Albert Camus, "The Guest."  
Assignments  
Assignment 2: The Literature of Europe (2 pts)

Listen to Lecture 4: European Poetry. Barnet, Chapter 11, "Writing About
Poetry"  
Lim and Spenser, "A Note on Poetry" W. H. Auden, "The Unknown Citizen" and  
"Musee de Beaux Arts." William Butler Yeats, "Easter, 1916." Seamus Heaney,  
"Digging." Complete Graham Greene, The End of the Affair. View the film The
End  
of the Affair. Barnet, Chapter 13, "Writing About Film"  
Assignments  
Assignment 3: European Poetry (2 pts)

Week 3

Listen to Lecture 5: Russian Fiction. Issac Babel, "My First Goose." Tatyana  
Tolstaya, "Fire and Dust."  
Assignments  
Assignment 4: Russian Fiction (2 pts)

Week 4

Listen to Lecture 6: Eastern Eurpoean Fiction--A Fictitious Family. Milan
Kundera,  
"Edward and God."  
Assignments  
Assignment 5: Eastern European Fiction--A Fictitious Family (2 pts)

Listen to Lecture 7: Friedrich Durrenmatt. Barnet, Chapter 10, "Writing About  
Drama" Lim and Spenser, "A Note on Drama" Friedrich Durrenmatt, The Visit.  
Assignments  
Assignment 6: Friedrich Durrenmatt

Listen to Lecture 8: Italo Calvino. Italo Calvino, "The Adventure of a
Reader."  
Assignments  
Assignment 7: Italo Calvino (2 pts)

Week 5

Assignments  
Assignment 8--Review of Web Sites on European Fiction (3 pts)  
Assignment 9--Essay: The Literature of Europe (10 points)

_Part 3: The Literature of Asia_

Week 6

Listen to Lecture 9: An Introduction to Asia. See the film, "Raise the Red
Lantern."  
Assignments  
Assignment 10: The Literature of Asia (2 pts)

Listen to Lecture 10: Lu Xun. Lu Xun, "My Old Home," "A Small Incident"  
Assignments  
Assignment 11: Lu Xun (2 pts)  
  
Listen to Lecture 11: Ding Ling. Ding Ling, "When I Was in Xia Village."  
Assignments  
Assignment 12: Ding Ling (2 pts)

Week 7  
  
Listen to Lecture 12: Yukio Mishima. Yukio Mishima, "Patriotism"  
Assignments  
Assignment 13: Yukio Mishima(2 pts)

Week 8  
  
Listen to Lecture 13: Pramoedya Anata Toer. Pramoedya Anata Toer, "Inem"  
Assignments  
Assignment 14: Pramoedya Anata Toer (2pts)  
  
Listen to Lecture 14: Mashaweta Devi. Mashaweta Devi, "Breast-Giver"  
Assignments  
Assignment 15: Mashaweta Devi (2 pts)

Week 9  
  
Assignment 16--Review of Web Sites on Asian Fiction (3 pts)  
Assignment 17--Essay: The Literature of Asia (10 pts)

_Part 4: The Literature of Africa and the Middle East_

Week 10  
  
Listen to Lecture 15: An Introduction to Africa and the Middle East. Begin
Chinua  
Achebe, Things Fall Apart.  
Assignments  
Assignment 18: An Introduction to Africa and the Middle East (2 pts)

Week 11  
  
Listen to Lecture 16: Chinua Achebe. Complete Chinua Achebe, Things Fall
Apart.  
Chinia Achebe, "Civil Peace."  
Assignments  
Assignment 19: Chinua Achebe (2 pts)

Week 12  
  
Listen to Lecture 17: A New Tradition--African and Arabic Literature. Read
Naguib  
Mahfouz, "The Happy Man."  
Assignments  
Assignment 20: A New Tradition--African and Arabic Literature (2 pts)

Week 13

Listen to Lecture 18: Ngugi wa Thiong'o. Ngugi wa Thiong'o, "The Return."  
Assignments  
Assignment 21: Ngugi wa Thiong'o (2 pts)

Week 14

Listen to Lecture 19: An Overview of Contemporary Israeli Literature. Read
Yehuda  
Amichai, "Jerusalem" and "Sort of an Apocalypse." Amoz Oz, "Nomad and Viper."  
Assignments  
Assignment 22: An Overview of Contemporary Israeil Literature (2 pts)

Assignments  
Assignment 23: Web Sites on the Literature of Africa and the Middle East (3
pts)  
Assignment 24: Essay on the Literature of Africa and the Middle East  
(10 pts)

_Part 5: Putting it all Together_

Week 15

Course Conclusion  
  
Listen to Lecture 20: Course Conclusion  
Assignments  
Assignment 25: Course Conclusion (2 pts)  
Group Project  
Assignment 26: Group Work (11 pts)  
Course Portfolio Due

