History 102: The Modern Era--Western Civilization II

Fall 2001, MWF 1:30-2:20, DE 113A

Professor David Stone Office: EH 318  
email: stone@ksu.edu phone: 532-2978

Office hours: M 10:00-11:00; W 2:30-4:00

Read this syllabus carefully. Most of your questions about the class are
answered here. If you don't find your answer here, please feel free to ask me
for clarification.

GRADE BREAKDOWN: First paper 20%  
Second paper 20%  
Midterm 20%  
Final exam 30%  
Three quizzes 10%

REQUIREMENTS:

1) READING. I expect you to keep up with the course reading.

2) ATTENDANCE. We are all adults, and I will not take attendance. You should
be aware, however, that students who fail (last year, 1 in 7 who took the
class) are overwhelmingly from among those who do not attend regularly. If you
miss class, you are responsible for getting the material you miss; do not come
to me for notes.

3) PARTICIPATION. Because this class is so large, we cannot have much class
discussion. I do welcome your questions, however, both in class, after class,
and during office hours. Please feel free to contact me if you do not
understand something or wish to learn more.

4) WRITING. You will write two short papers during the semester based on the
primary sources in the Wiesner / Ruff / Wheeler volume. Topics will be
distributed over the class listserv. I expect papers to be handed in on time,
and late papers will be marked down 10% for each day they are late. I also
expect them to be written in clear, grammatical English. Papers which don't
meet this standard will be returned for an immediate rewrite.

These papers are intended to give you an introduction to working with primary
sources. They will probably not be like other papers you have written in the
past, as they are intended to teach you some of the skills needed to work with
primary sources.

5) EXAMS. We will have a midterm and a final, consisting of paragraph-length
identifications of important individuals, concepts, and events, along with
essay questions over the lectures and readings. The final will cover only
material since the midterm. You will need to bring your own blue books: blue
covered booklets on sale in the bookstore for writing your exam answers.  
6) QUIZZES. The quizzes will NOT be announced ahead of time, and will cover
major concepts from the Kagan / Ozment / Turner textbook. They are intended to
make sure you are keeping up with the reading. The questions will be designed
to be very simple if you have done the reading. Each quiz is worth four points
towards your final grade, so it is possible to score 12 points out of 10. I
will discuss the details of this in class.

7) EMAIL ACCOUNT. You are required to be part of the class listserv. All of
you will be automatically subscribed to it through your Kansas State email
account. If you usually use another email address (hotmail, yahoo, netscape,
or any other than ksu.edu), you need to subscribe to the listserv through the
account you normally use. Important course information will be distributed via
email.

8) TEXTS TO PURCHASE. All texts are required, and available in the Union and
at Varney's.  
Kagan / Ozment / Turner, Western Heritage  
Wiesner / Ruff / Wheeler, Discovering the Western Past  
Marx, Communist Manifesto  
Remarque, All Quiet on the Western Front  
Wiesel, Night

  
  
CLASS SCHEDULE

  
NOTE: the readings listed with a particular day are to be read BY THE START OF
CLASS THAT DAY

August 20: Introduction / Organization of the Class. Importance of history.

  
I. The Old Regime:

August 22: Constitutionalism and Absolutism. Read Kagan / Ozment / Turner,
Western Heritage, Chp. 13, pp. 416-446.

August 24: Successful and Unsuccessful States. Read Western Heritage, Chp. 15,
pp. 480-510.

August 27: Society and Economy under the Old Regime, pt. 1. Read Western
Heritage, Chp. 16, pp. 512-548.

August 29: Society and Economy under the Old Regime, pt. 2. Read Wiesner /
Ruff / Taylor, Discovering the Western Past, Chp. 1, pp. 1-37.

August 31: Life and Death in the Old Regime. Read Discovering, Chp. 4, pp.
95-115.

September 3: HOLIDAY. NO CLASS

September 5: The Scientific Revolution. Read Western Heritage, Chp. 14, pp.
448-478.

September 7: The Old Regime and the World. Read Western Heritage, Chp. 17, pp.
550-580.

  
II. The Destruction of the Old Regime

September 10: The Enlightenment, pt. 1. Read Discovering, Chp. 3, pp. 65-94.

September 12: The Enlightenment, pt. 2. Read Western Heritage, Chp. 18, pp.
588-622.

September 14: The French Revolution to the Fall of the Bastille. Read Western
Heritage, pp. 625-635; Discovering, Chp. 5, pp. 116-142.

September 17: The Radical Revolution. Read Western Heritage, pp. 636-663.

September 19: Napoleon. Read Western Heritage, pp. 666-684.

September 21: Romanticism. Read Western Heritage, pp. 689-702.

  
III. The Industrial Revolution and Its Enemies

September 24: The Congress of Vienna System. Read Western Heritage, pp. 684
689, 711-734.

FIRST PAPER DUE SEPTEMBER 24

September 26: Liberalism and Nationalism. Read Western Heritage, pp. 704-710;
Discovering, pp. 181-196.

September 28: Industrial Revolution. Read Western Heritage, pp. 742-760.

October 1: Family and Society during the Industrial Revolution. Read
Discovering, Chp. 6, pp. 143-180.

October 3: Socialism and Communism. Read Western Heritage, pp. 760-764;
Communist Manifesto, pp. 63-97.

October 5: Famine and Revolution. Read Western Heritage, pp. 754-775.

October 8: MIDTERM EXAM

  
IV. THE VICTORIAN ERA

October 10: The Rise of Nation-States. Read Western Heritage, Chp. 23, pp.
780-812.

October 12: The Birth of Modern Thought. Read Western Heritage, Chp. 25, pp.
853-884; Discovering, Chp. 10, pp. 273-299.

October 15: Victorian Society and Economy: Read Western Heritage, pp. 814-835

October 17: Victorian Life. Read Discovering, Chp. 8, pp. 212-250.

October 19: HOLIDAY

October 22: Victorian Politics. Read Western Heritage, pp. 835-850.

October 24: Imperialism and Racism. Read Western Heritage, pp. 886-897;
Discovering, Chp. 9, pp. 251-272.

  
V. World War I

October 26: The Road to War. Read Western Heritage, pp. 897-907. Start All
Quiet on the Western Front.

October 29: Stalemate. Read Western Heritage, pp. 907-915; Discovering, Chp.
11, pp. 300-334. Continue All Quiet.

October 31: The End of World War I. Read Western Heritage, pp. 915-920; finish
All Quiet.

November 2: Treaty of Versailles. Read Western Heritage, pp. 920-926.

November 5: The 1920s. Read Western Heritage, pp. 934-37, 942-962.

November 7: The Soviet Experiment. Read Western Heritage, pp. 938-942, 982
990.

November 9: The Great Depression. Read Western Heritage, pp. 964-973.

  
VI. World War II.

November 12: The Rise of Hitler. Read Western Heritage, pp. 973-982;
Discovering, Chp. 13, pp. 364-393

November 14: World War II, pt. 1. Read Western Heritage, Chap. 29, pp. 994
1028.

November 16: World War II, pt. 2. Start Wiesel's Night.

November 19: The Holocaust. Finish Wiesel's Night.

SECOND PAPER DUE NOVEMBER 19

November 21, 23 THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY

  
VII. Post-War Europe.

November 26: The Cold War. Read Western Heritage, pp. 1068-1085.

November 28: Decolonization and Unification. Read Western Heritage, pp. 1085
1094.

November 30: The 1960s. Read Discovering, Chp. 14, pp. 394-425.

December 3: Modern European Society. Read Western Heritage, pp. 1048-1066;
Discovering, Chp. 15, pp. 426-456.

December 5: The Fall of Communism. Read Western Heritage, pp. 1094-1114.

December 7: Yugoslavia.

  
  
FINAL EXAM: Tuesday, December 11, 11:50AM to 1:40PM

ACADEMIC HONESTY AND DISHONESTY

I expect students to work honestly, and the vast majority of students do.
Every semester, however, I catch one or two students cheating, and my policy
on cheating is to assign a grade of F for the course and turn in the student
involved to the Honor System.

>From the Honor System website (http://www.ksu.edu/honor):

**Kansas State University has an Undergraduate Honor System based on personal
integrity which is presumed to be sufficient assurance in academic matters
one's work is performed honestly and without unauthorized assistance.
Undergraduate students, by registration, acknowledge the jurisdiction of the
Undergraduate Honor System. The policies and procedures of the Undergraduate
Honor System apply to all full and part-time students enrolled in
undergraduate courses on-campus, off-campus, and via distance learning.  
A component vital to the Honor System is the inclusion of the Honor Pledge
which applies to all assignments, examinations, or other course work
undertaken by undergraduate students. The Honor Pledge is implied, whether or
not it is stated: "On my honor, as a student, I have neither given nor
received unauthorized aid on this academic work."  
A grade of XF can result from a breach of academic honesty. An XF would be
failure of the course with the X on the transcript indicating failure as a
result of a breach of academic honesty.

** There are two main types of academic dishonesty that concern me in this
course. The first is cheating on quizzes and exams. While this happens
relatively rarely given the type of exams I give, any cheating of this sort
(crib sheets, copying from a neighbor) is grounds for failing the course and a
referral to the Honor System.

The more common type of academic dishonesty, in my experience, is plagiarism
on papers.

WHAT IS PLAGIARISM?

Plagiarism is essentially presenting someone else's work as your own. This can
involve turning in a paper written by someone else, taking a paper from the
internet, or not properly giving credit to sources. For another definition,
see the Honor System's discussion at http://www.ksu.edu/honor/examples.htm

WHY IS PLAGIARISM WRONG?

Plagiarism combines lying and stealing. Plagiarizing is lying, because it
falsely takes credit for work actually done by someone else. It is stealing,
because it takes the product of someone else's labor.

Plagiarism also makes the exchange of ideas impossible. How can you trust what
someone tells you if you can't check it yourself? You need to be able to
examine evidence for yourself to be sure that an argument makes sense, but you
can't do that if the sources aren't available.

HOW DO I AVOID PLAGIARISM?

Avoiding plagiarism is simple. You need to do two things. First, if you take
an idea, concept, or fact from someone else, you must give credit to your
source. That's usually done through a footnote, endnote, or parenthetical
reference. HOW exactly you give credit isn't so important; what's important is
actually doing it.

EXAMPLE: Peasant violence typically happened in two ways: widespread, extended
rebellions and local, short-term riots (Wiesner, pp. 1-2).

Second, if you use someone else's exact words, you have to indicate that.
Otherwise, you're taking credit for someone else's work. You indicate your use
of exact words by quotation marks (or a blocked quote for longer quotations)
around the passages you've taken, and some sort of reference to the source.

EXAMPLE: Jean Bodin argues that sovereignty is the power to make law, "not
necessarily with the consent of superiors, equals, or inferiors" (Wiesner, p.
46).

Plagiarism is disregarding either one of these rules: taking information
without giving credit, or taking someone else's language without showing that
and giving credit.

  
WHAT ABOUT THE INTERNET?

Information on the internet is no different than information in books and
other printed sources. If you take ideas or exact words from the internet
without giving credit, you have lied about your work, stolen someone else's
work, and committed plagiarism.

Identifying your sources is even more important with internet sources. While
getting a book published involves getting an editor and a publisher to agree
that your work is worthwhile, any idiot can put absolutely anything on the
net. Wouldn't you like to know if your information about Hitler, for example,
comes from the American Nazi Party?

