![](IUNorthwest.gif)  
![IUN History](scroll.gif)  
**_HISTORY_**  
  ** _Regularly Offered Courses_**

Broadly speaking, particularly from the student's point of view, the
department offers three types of courses: broad general surveys; studies of
specific areas, periods, and/or problems; and the more specialized, more
interactive, and often more student-driven courses particularly for majors
such as proseminars, reading courses, and thesis writing courses. In the
discussion below, an underlined course or name of a faculty member indicates a
link to more information -- for example, a sample syllabus for the course, or
for a particular faculty member's section of that course. Note: the course
titles used in the list below may differ slightly from the official Bulletin
titles, but they accurately reflect course content.

The **Broad General Surveys** are designed particularly to introduce the
student with little or no historical background to "the basics" of history
over a very broad range of times and/or places. Typically they provide
opportunities for looking at major patterns of development and/or comparing
evidence from quite different times or places. They include:

  *  H105-H106 _American History I_ and _II_
    * The history of the United States from the colonial period to the present. (Cohen, Lane, Wollons)
  * H113-H114 _Western Civilization I_ and _II_
    * Europe, particularly Western Europe, in its many transformations from ancient times to the present. (Chen Lin, Chary, [Kern](KERNH113.htm), [Andrejevich](mailto:mandreje@iun.edu))
  * History H232/B391, _the World in the 20th Century_
    * also should be considered at least in part a broad general survey. While it only covers the last 100 years or so, it covers them in the context of the entire world, so it too has quite a broad sweep.   (Chen Lin, [Kern](KERNH232.htm)).

In our experience, students who take surveys tend to be far too concerned
about sequence, that is, about being sure they have taken H105 before they
enroll for H106 and so on. While knowledge of what happened before your course
begins is always going to be helpful, history is not as cumulative a
discipline as, say, arithmetic (where if you miss your "times four" tables,
for example, it then becomes almost impossible to go on). Students who have
had H113 may have some advantage over others in H114, but then students who
take H114 first will probably enjoy a similar advantage over other students
when they take H113 -- and may find H113 more meaningful, since they "know how
the story comes out," so to speak. So don't be afraid to take the part II
course before part I if that works better for your schedule.

Our **Studies of specific areas, periods, and problems** are sometimes called
"advanced" courses, perhaps because they have higher (200- to 400-level)
numbers, but in fact they are not necessarily more difficult than the surveys.
Above all they are courses which cover a smaller geographic area and/or a
smaller time span than the general surveys, so they provide coverage of less
sweeping subject matter, in more depth than a survey can offer. Some
background knowledge of the area or time period covered would of course be
helpful to the student, but interest in the subject and perhaps some maturity
as a student are really the only absolute requirements. Some students ( _e.g._
, those who tend to get overwhelmed trying to keep information from very
different categories properly sorted) might even find some of these courses
more interesting than, and therefore easier to handle than, surveys. The
classes are usually smaller, as well.

So the average student also doesn't necessarily need to be afraid of taking a
200 to 400 level course studying a specific area, period or problem if that
suits his or her own program and interests. In particular, we do not formally
require credit in H105 or 106 before taking other United States history
courses, or in H113-114 before taking European courses. Also, as a result of
trying to adapt a numbering system instituted for the very large Bloomington
campus to the needs of IUN students, many of these area, period or problem
studies courses are offered at two levels of credit, under two separate
numbers, concurrently. Often, for example, where a 300- or 400-level of course
credit requires a major research paper or similar major writing project, a
200-level number is also offered, meeting at the same time, for credit without
that paper (or otherwise with somewhat less research or writing). Such double-
listing provides an opportunity for the student whose schedule may not allow
for the time needed to do a serious paper to learn most or all of the same
material. If a particular subject among these courses interests you, but you
are concerned about a possible background or difficulty problem, feel free to
discuss your particular situation with the instructor teaching the course (who
will know better than anyone else just what kind of demands the course makes).

Courses in this category are typically further subdivided geographically into
courses in the history of the United States, of Europe from the Middle Ages to
the present, and of Non-Western or Other areas or topics ( _e.g._ , history of
places other than the United States or Europe, or of times before the Middle
Ages). These subdivisions are, for example, used in requirements for History
majors and minors.

**United States:**

  * H220 American Military History (Kern)
  * H228/A380 the Vietnam War (Lane)
  * H260 History of Women in the U.S. (Wollons)
  * A301 Colonial and Revolutionary America (Cohen)
  * A313 the United States, 1865-1917 (Lane)
  * A314 United States, 1917-1945 (Lane)
  * A315 Recent U.S. History [since 1945] (Cohen)
  * A323 Social History of American Education (Cohen)
  * A346 American Diplomatic History [Foreign Policy] (Lane)
  * A347 American Urban History (Lane, Siegel)
  * A348 Civil War and Reconstruction
  * A361 Studies in American History for Teachers (Cohen, Lane)
  * A382 the U.S. in the Sixties (Lane)

The numbers for _Special Topics_ , H225/T325 (or T326)/T425 (or T426), are
used in this subdivision for areas of particular interest for which no formal
number otherwise exists, perhaps most frequently for:

  * American Popular Music (Cohen)
  * History of the Calumet Region (archivist Steve McShane)
  * Women in the U.S. in the 20th Century (Wollons)

**Europe:**

courses which cover _Europe as a whole_ in a particular time period:

  * H219 Origins and History of the Second World War (Chary)
  * B356 the French Revolution and Napoleon (Kern)
  * B359 Europe from [Napoleon to World War I](KERNB359.htm) (Kern)
  * B361 Europe in the [Twentieth Century I](KERNB361.htm) [1900-1945] (Kern)
  * B362 Europe in the [Twentieth Century II](KERNB362.htm) [since 1945] (Kern)

courses which cover particular _countries_ or _geographic areas_

  * H201/D409 Russian Civilization I [to 1917] (Chary)
  * H202/D410 the Russian Revolutions and the Soviet Regime (Chary)
  * D303 Heroes and Villains in Russian History (Chary)
  * B393 [German History](KERNB393.htm) from Bismarck to Hitler (Kern)
  * D425 History of the Balkans, 1804-1923 (Chary)
  * D426 the Balkans, 1914 to the present (Chary)
  * D427 the Habsburg Empire, 1780-1918 (Chary)
  * D431 Eastern Europe since World War II (Chary)

Special Topics numbers such as B221 and H225 are used in this subdivision to
offer 200-level credit for many of the 300- and 400-level numbers, and the
H225/T425 listing has also been used in recent years for such topics as

  * History of the Witchhunt and Popular Culture, 1500-1750 (Tomaschewsky)
  * History of Poland (Chary)
  * Hitler's Germany (Kern)

**Non-Western and Other**

_ancient history_

  * H205 [Ancient Civilization](KERNH205.htm) (Kern)
  * C386 Classical Greek History (Kern)

_a global survey_

  * H232/B391 The World in the Twentieth Century (Chen Lin, [Kern](KERNH232.htm))
  * H225/H425 [Worlds Apart: Comtemporary Regional Conflicts](http://www.iun.edu/~historyn/conflicts.htm) ([Andrejevich](mailto:mandreje@iun.edu))

_African history_

  * H227 African Civilization (Rotz)

_Far Eastern history_

  * H207 [Modern East Asian Civilization](H207SYL.htm) [China and Japan] (Chen Lin)
  * G485 Modern China (Chen Lin)
  * G487 Contemporary China (Chen Lin)

_Islamic and Middle Eastern History_

  * H203/C391 Islamic Civilization I, to c. 1600 [Medieval Middle East] (Rotz)
  * H204/C392 Islamic Civilization II, c. 1300 to the present [Modern Middle East] (Rotz)

  
**Proseminars, Reading Courses, and Thesis Writing Courses** are the courses
designed more specifically to meet the needs of history majors, although non-
majors with good backgrounds in history are of course welcome. These courses
may be offered by any faculty member in the department.

_Proseminars_ (J495) typically deal with one significant historical problem
for an entire semester. Students in these courses should expect limited
enrollment, lots of reading, and probably reports to the class and/or a major
research paper as well. Occasionally, a proseminar is also offered
concurrently at the 200 level (H215), for non-majors who want to join the
reading and discussion without as much research.

  * H215 Proseminar in History
    * [strongly recommended: H113-114 or H105-106, depending on the topic of the seminar]
  * J495 Proseminar for History Majors

_Reading Courses_ and _Thesis Writing Courses_ are typically arranged for a
particular student who wants to pursue a particular subject area or topic in
greater depth than is available through our standard course offerings. Usually
they are offered at the request of a history major, but reading courses in
areas not covered by our regular offerings can be arranged for interested non-
majors as well. For example, we have offered H211, _Latin American Culture and
Civilization_ , and H230, _History of Canada_ , as reading courses more than
once. In a reading course, a student is largely on his or her own with a
sizeable bibliography on a subject area or topic, checking in with the
instructor perhaps every couple of weeks or so to discuss what has been read,
and writing reports periodically. Writing a senior thesis puts the student
even more on his or her own, as the student seeks to make a real contribution
to historical scholarship, albeit at the undergraduate level.

  * H495 Undergraduate Readings in History
  * K493 Reading for Honors in History
  * K499 Senior Honors Thesis

![arrow](arrowrt.gif)[to Current Course Offerings](sp02sem.htm)

![arrow](arrowrt.gif)[to the History Faculty](faclist.htm)  
    
  [![Click for History home
page](scroll.gif)](http://www.iun.edu/~historyn/)[to History home
page](http://www.iun.edu/~historyn/) | ![Click for IUN home page](IUNlogo.gif)  
     [to IUN home page](http://www.iun.edu/)  
---|---  
  
* * *

Last Updated: 20 April 2001  
http://www.iun.edu/~historyn/corslist.htm  
Comments: [History Department Webmaster](mailto:historyn@iun.edu)  
[Copyright ](http://www.indiana.edu/copyright.html)1998 \- 2000, The Trustees
of [Indiana University](http://www.indiana.edu)

  

