History 20                                      Mr. Slap

Fall 2001                                                   220 Weaver

American History: 1492 - 1877

  

Goals: This course will cover the story of America to 1877, concentrating on
the theme of slavery. We will consider, among other questions, why did slavery
begin in America, whether the American Revolution really was a revolution, why
the Civil War occurred, and why the North won the Civil War. Beside the
historical content, this course will concentrate on developing general liberal
arts skills, particularly the abilities to determine the thesis and analyze
the arguments of a reading, and write a thesis and support an argument with
evidence yourself.

  

Grading:  

                        Exams (3 @ 25 points)     75 points

                        Discussion      25 points

  

Readings:

                        _A People and a Nation, Volume I, to 1877_ , 6th edition, Norton, et. al.

                        _American Slavery_ , ed., William Dudley

  

Procedures:

  

Classes will be a combination of lecture and discussion. It is important to
come to class prepared to participate.

  

Discussion is dependent upon attendance, preparation, and participation for
all classes. Short quizzes will be given on discussion days and contribute
toward discussion grade. Credit is not given for simply attending class, but
poor attendance (more than three absences) indicates an inability to
participate and will affect the discussion grade. The three absences allowed
are for illness and family emergencies. For prolonged illnesses and family
emergencies see the instructor. The instructor reserves the right to fail any
student who misses more than a third (12) of the classes.

  

Exams and the final will be blue book exams, consisting of short answer and
essay questions. The exams and final are non-cumulative. The short answer
questions will ask you to place a term chronologically, define it, and explain
its historical significance. There will be no study guides given out for the
exams, but each student can bring a 3x5 or 5x8 index card of notes, both
sides, to the exams. The card must have the student's name on it and be turned
in with the exam. Students are responsible for all material covered in class
or assigned as reading.

  

Extra Credit will be given for a letter to the editor that appears in either
the _Collegian_ or the _Centre Daily Times_ , using knowledge you have gained
in class to support your position on a current issue. Subjects can range from
race relations at Penn State to violence in the Middle East. Your historical
evidence, of course, must be accurate and appropriate to your argument and the
instructor reserves the right to determine if a letter meets the criteria for
extra credit. Please check if you have any questions in regard to types of
evidence or how to use it in a letter to the editor. This is the only extra
credit option available and only the first letter will receive extra credit.

  

Academic Integrity is taken seriously at Penn State. Any cases of plagiarism
or cheating will result in failing the course and possible disciplinary
sanctions. For more information on exactly what constitutes plagiarism and
cheating, and what the penalties for it are, you may ask the instructor or
examine the College of Liberal Arts website, www.la.psu.edu.

  

Courtesy is important to maintain the learning environment. This means coming
to class on time, paying attention without reading the newspaper, excessive
chatting, etc. Students who persist in discourteous behavior will be asked to
leave the class. You are encouraged to ask the instructor questions during the
lectures.

  

Make-ups will not be granted for exams UNLESS they are the usual, verifiable
emergencies of death in the family or sickness. Please provide proof of the
conflict in these instances.

  

Office Hours will be MWF, 9:00-9:50, and by appointment. If you have questions
please come to office hours or make an appointment. Office hours, and before
and after class, are the best times for questions on the course material.

  

Finally, the instructor reserves the right to amend this syllabus to fit the
changing needs and circumstances of the class.



COURSE SCHEDULE

  

Section One: A New Republic

  

  

Session

|  

Topic

|  

Assignments  
  
---|---|---  
  
August 22

|

Introduction

|  
  
24

|

Discussion: What is Slavery?

|

_American Slavery_ , 9-32  
  
27

|

Colonial South

|

_A People and a Nation_ , 38-48,65-6, 70  
  
29

|

Slavery in the New World

|

_A People and a Nation_ , 70-80, 89, 105-7  
  
31

|

Discussion: Origins of American Slavery

|

_American Slavery_ , 34-66, 197-201

QUIZ  
  
September 5

|

The Emerging American Mind

|

_A People and a Nation_ , 98-104, 107-12  
  
7

|

A Changing Empire

|

_A People and a Nation_ , 115-39  
  
10

|

Independence

|

_A People and a Nation_ , 141-65  
  
12

|

A Revolutionary People?

|

_A People and a Nation_ , 167-78  
  
14

|

Discussion: The American Revolution & Slavery

|

_American Slavery_ , 68-81, 201-215

QUIZ  
  
17

|

Adopting the Constitution

|

_A People and a Nation_ , 178-93  
  
19

|

Competing Visions of America:

Hamilton and Jefferson

|

_A People and a Nation_ , 195-203  
  
21

|

The Rise of Partisan Politics

|

_A People and a Nation_ , 203-15  
  
24

|

Jeffersonian Republicanism

|

_A People and a Nation_ , 217-41  
  
26

|

The Rise of Nationalism and a Market Economy

|

_A People and a Nation_ , 243-75  
  
28

|

EXAM

|  
  
Section Two: The Republic Tested



Session

|

Topic

|

Assignments  
  
---|---|---  
  
October 1

|

The Old South

|

_A People and a Nation_ , 331-44  
  
3

|

Slavery in Ante-Bellum America

|

_A People and a Nation_ , 344-54  
  
5

|

Discussion: Social Tensions Within Southern Plantation Society

|

_American Slavery_ , 113-20

_A People and a Nation_ , 354-6

QUIZ  
  
8

|

OCTOBER BREAK - NO CLASS

|  
  
10

|

The New North

|

_A People and a Nation_ , 303-329  
  
12

|

The Age of Reform

|

_A People and a Nation_ , 277-87  
  
15

|

Crusade Against Slavery

|

_A People and a Nation_ , 283-7  
  
17

|

The Slave Power Conspiracy

|

_A People and a Nation_ , 364-5  
  
19

|

Discussion: Early Sectional Tensions Over Slavery

|

_American Slavery_ , 83-112, 216-22

QUIZ  
  
22

|

Westward Expansion

|

_A People and a Nation_ , 297-301, 359-379  
  
24

|

The Rise of the Republican Party: Free Soil, Free Labor, Free Men

|

_A People and a Nation_ , 372, 374  
  
26

|

Discussion: Slavery and Sectional Tension in the 1850s

|

_American Slavery_ , 121-35, 222-31

QUIZ  
  
29

|

The 1857: The Turning Point

|

<span styl

