100.338 - **** Property and power: African political economies in historical
perspective

Professor Berry  

|

![](../graphics/logo.gif)  
  
---|---  
  


Fall 2000 Office hours: Th 11:00-1:00  
Gilman 225  
sberry@jhu.edu (410) 516-7577

**I. Boundaries**

**Legacies of colonial rule (9/7-8)**

Mahmood Mamdani, 1996. Citizen and subject, 3-34.

Dickson Eyoh, 1999. "Community, citizenship and the politics of ethnicity in
post-colonial Africa," in Zeleza & Kalipeni, eds., Sacred spaces and public
quarrels, 271-99.

**"The creation of tribalism" (9/14-15)**

Patrick Harries, 1987. "Exclusion, classification and internal colonialism:
the emergence of ethnicity among Tsonga speakers of South Africa, in Leroy
Vail, ed. The creation of tribalism in southern Africa, 82-117.

Alison DesForges, 1999. Leave none to tell the story, 1-14, 31-64.

Recommended: T.O. Ranger, 1983. "The invention of tradition in Colonial
Africa," in E. Hobsbawm & T.O. Ranger, eds., The invention of tradition,
211-62.

**Displacement (9/21-22)**

Kirk Hoppe, 1997, "Lords of the fly: colonial visions and revisions of African
sleeping sickness environments on Ugandan Lake Victoria, 1900-1962," Africa,
16, 86-106.

Sam Moyo, 1995. The land question in Zimbabwe, 1-34.



**II. Political experiments**

**Liberation struggles: the case of Zimbabwe (9/28-29)**

T.O. Ranger, 1985. Peasant consciousness and guerrilla war, 177-222.

Norma Kriger, 1992. Zimbabwe's guerrilla war, 116-69.

Recommended: Kriger, 1988. "The Zimbabwean war of liberation: struggles within
the struggle," Journal of Southern African Studies, 14, 2:304-22.

**African socialism, one party states, and military rule (10/5-12)**

**Senegal (10/5)**

L.A. Villalon, 1995. Islamic society and state power in Senegal, 76-114.

Leopold Senghor, 1964. On African socialism, 67-103.

**Tanzania (10/6)**

James Scott, 1998. Seeing like a state, 262-306.

Julius Nyerere, 1968. Ujamaa: essays on socialism, 1-43.

**Nigeria (10/12)**

Toyin Falola, 1998. Violence in Nigeria, ch. 2.

Adebayo Olukoshi & Osita Agbu, 1996. "The deepening crisis of Nigerian
federalism and the future of the nation-state," in Olukoshi & Laakso, eds.
Challenges to the nation-state in Africa, 74-101.

**Democratization? (10/13-27)**

**Ambiguous elections (10/13)**

Pearl Robinson, 1994. "The national conference phenomenon in francophone West
Africa," Comparative Studies in Society and History, 36:575-610.

Mariane Ferme, 1999. "Staging p litisi: the dialogics of publicity And secrecy
in Sierra Leone," in Comaroff & Comaroff, eds., Civil society and the
political imagination in Africa, 160-91.

**Reconfiguring the state (10/19-20)**

Leonardo Villalon  & P.A.Huxtable, eds., 1998. The African state at a critical
juncture, chs. 5,6,8 & 9\.

**Chieftaincy: "decentralized despotism" or institutional proliferation?
(10/26)**

Cyprian Fisiy  & Miriam Goheen, 1998. "Power and the quest for recognition:
neo-traditional titles among the new elite in Nso', Cameroon," Africa, 68,
3:383-402.

T.O. Ranger, 1993. "The Communal Areas of Zimbabwe," in T. Bassett & D.
Crummey, eds. Land in African agrarian systems, 354-85.



**III. Imperialism without governmen t**

**Structural adjustment: from debt to poverty (10/27)**

Paul Collier & Jan Gunning, 1999. "Why has Africa grown slowly?" Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 13, 3:3-22.

Thandika Mkandawire & Charles Soludo, 1999. Our continent, our Future, 21-48.

**Environmentalism (11/2-3)**

K. Cleaver & G. Schreiber, 1994. Reversing the spiral, 1-15.

World Bank, 1996. Towards environmentally sustainable development in sub-
Saharan Africa, 11-21, 81-93.

Jocelyn Alexander & JoAnn McGregor, nd. "'Our sons didn't die for animals':
attitudes to wildlife and the politics of development: Campfire in Nkayi and
Lupane Districts, Zimbabwe."

Barrie Sharpe, 1998. "'First the forest': conservation, 'community,' and
'participation' in south-west Cameroon," Africa, 68, 1:25-45.

**IV. Coping with confusion? Border economies (11/9-10)**

Janet MacGaffey, et al., 1991. The real economy of Zaire, 5-40.

Daniel Bach, ed., 1999. Regionalization in Africa: integration and
disintegration, 169-88. (Essays by Stary and MacGaffey & Bazenguissa-Ganga.)

**Warlord politics (11/16-17)**

William Reno, 1998. Warlord politics, ch. on Sierra Leone. Paul Richards,
1996\. Fighting for the rainforest, xiii-xxix, 105-24.

Living with instability (11/30, 12/1) Maliqalim Simone & David Hecht, 1994\.
Invisible governance, esp. chs. 1-3.

Paul Lovejoy & Pat Williams, eds., 1997. Displacement and the politics of
violence in Nigeria, 22-31, 93-109.

**Born again? (12/7-8)**

Birgit Meyer, 1998. "Making a complete break with the past: memory and
postcolonial modernity in Ghanaian Pentecostalist discourse," Journal of
Religion in Africa, 28, 3:316-49.

Ruth Marshall-Fratani, 1998. "Mediating the global and the local in Nigerian
Pentecostalism," Journal of Religion in Africa, 28, 3:278-315.

Pat Williams & Toyin Falola, eds., 1995. Religious impact on the Nation state,
159-98.



**Reading materials:** ALL assigned readings are on reserve in MSEL. Most are
available on line, except for book excerpts marked with an asterisk (*).
(Because these include more than 10% of the book, the library is prevented by
copyright laws from putting them on the Web.)  

     The following books may also be purchased at the JHU Book Center: Villalon & Huxtable, The African state at a critical juncture Simone & Hecht, Invisible governance 

**Class participation:** Students are expected to come to class having read
the material assigned for that day and prepared to take part in class
discussions. There will be occasional lectures, to present background
information on new topics, but most class time will be devoted to discussion.

**Written assignments:** Students will be required to submit two short essays
(5-7 pages each) based on assigned reading materials, and either a research
paper (ca 20 pages) on a topic of your choice, or a take home final exam.

The assignment sheet for each short essay will be distributed in class the
week before the essay is due. **The first short essay is due on Sept. 29; the
second on Oct. 20.**

Students who opt to write the research paper must have their **topics approved
by Oct. 27. The paper is due on or before Dec. 8.**

The final exam will consist of essay questions, and will cover the entire
course. Questions will be distributed during the last week of classes. **The
exam is due on or before Dec. 15.**



**Grades:** Short essays = 20% each; research paper or final exam = 50%; class
participation = 10%. **Exception:** if the grade on the research paper or
final exam is better than the average of the two short essays, the research
paper/final exam will count for 70% of the course grade, and the lower of the
two short essay grades will be dropped.

_



Syllabi:

_

     100.338 Property and Power: African political economies in historical perspective

     [070.614](S_Berry_070.614.html) Anthropologicall subjects: on method

[Curriculum Vita](Sara_Berry_CV.html)

[Back to Sara Berry](Sara_Berry.html)

_

[Back to History Faculty](Faculty_at_Hopkins.html)

_  
---  
  


