### HISTORY 588  
SLAVERY IN COMPARATIVE CONTEXT

_

Course Objectives

_

This course is intended to introduce students to comparative social history by
exploring a sometimes controversial topic without the controversial rhetoric,
and with a knowledge which goes beyond the usual stereo-types concerning
slavery. Students will learn to set the U.S. institution/experience of slavery
within a wider context by questioning/constructing new definitions and pushing
the boundaries of conventional wisdom on the subject. The goal is to promote
critical thinking in a number of ways: writing, facilitating discussion,
approaching history topically, as opposed to chronologically or
geographically.

_

Course Requirements

_

Students are expected to take part in discussion, do the assigned readings by
the date they are listed on the syllabus, and answer (in no more than one
page) the set of questions listed below for each book or article by a
different author, handing in the questions on the day the readings are due.
These should be kept in a loose-leaf notebook.

1\. What is the author trying to prove regarding slavery or unfree labor?

2\. What was the origin and cause of slavery in the author's view?

3\. How is slavery defined in this reading? Who profited from it?

4\. Do you see any unconscious bias in this author? Is there a political
message here, intentional or not?

There will be one short paper (6-8 pages double-spaced, I inch margins,
typewritten) for this class. In order to pursue fairness, lateness for written
work will incur a penalty of one grade per day. The topic is to be selected
from among those asterisked on the syllabus. You are expected to summarize
your findings for the class on the day your paper is due as a contribution to
our discussion. Each student is expected to participate in one debate along
with other students, and to take responsibility as a facilitator, with one
other student, for leading the discussion of readings on one occasion. There
will be a take-home final examination.

_

Grading

_

Grades will be assigned according to the following criteria:

    
    
    
    
    Class participation (attendance, discussion, facilitating)20%
    
    
    Debate10%
    
    
    Paper25%
    
    
    Notebook (questions)25%
    
    
    Final examination20%
    
    
    
    
    TOTAL100%
    
    
    

_Books_ : can be purchased at SBX. All are on closed reserve, but buy them if
you can.

  1. Bradley, K.R.. _Slaves and Masters in the Roman Empire_
  2. Equiano. Olaudah, _Travels_
  3. Suzanne and Igor Kopytoff. _Slavery in Africa_
  4. Blassingame. John, _The Slave Community_
  5. Jacobs, Harriet (Linda Brent), _Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl_
  6. Reader--available at Copeez (Bricker Hall) Class Schedule 



_Schedule_

22 Sept. Introduction, organization

27 Sept. Defining and modelling slavery IReader-excerpts by St. Croix; Watson,
ch.l; Miers and Kopytoff, intro. (pp. 3-81)

29 Sept. Defining and modelling slavery IIReader-excerpt by Patterson (pp.
1-101)

4 Oct. The Ancient World--Near EastReader-excerpts by Lerner; Archer, Ch 6 by
Jackson, (pp. 86-101)

6 Oct. The Ancient World--CreeceReader-excerpts by Finley, 6-7, Economy and
Society, Chs. 9-11 (pp. 97- 132, 150-93)

*PAPER Did Greek slavery conform more to Patterson's or Miers' and Kopytoff's model?

11 Oct. The Ancient World-Rome Bradley--entire

13 Oct. The Ancient World Reader - excerpts by Finley, Classical Slavery, pp.
65-122; Joshel article, SIGNS (pp. 3-23)

DEBATE & PAPER: Where were slaves better/worse off, Greece or Rome?

18 Oct. European beginningsReader--excerpts by Patterson (pp. vii-xiii),
Wallerstein (pp. 85-91), Davis (pp. 51-82), Handlins (pp. 189-222)

DEBATE & PAPER: Why did Europeans begin taking African slaves?

20 Oct. African beginnings Reader--excerpts by Rodney (pp. 431-43), Lovejoy,
Chs. 1-2, 6 (pp. 1-43, 108-34)

DEBATE: Why did Africans get involved in the slave trade?

25 Oct. From Africa to the Americas Equiano, entire

PAPER: What impact did the slave trade have upon African societies?

27 Oct. Latin American and Caribbean Reader--excerpts by Morrissey,
perspectives Chs. 2, 6-7 (pp. 18-45, 81-118); Higman (pp. 261-87); Tomich (pp.
116-24)

1 Nov. Cuba--an example Reader--excerpts by Knight, Chs. 4-6 (pp. 59-136);
Martinez Alier, Chs. 5,7 (pp. 71-81, 101-19)

PAPER: Select a Caribbean or S. American country and examine the development
of slavery there.

3 Nov. North American perspectives Blassingame (pp. 41-131)

PAPER: Compare and contrast slaves' experiences in the U.S. and in the
Caribbean, or in Brazil (choose one or the other)

8 Nov. African-American slave families Reader--excerpts by Jones and women(pp.
235-69), Wood (pp. 603-622)

DEBATE & PAPER: Was the African American slave family male dominant?

10 Nov. What difference did being a woman make to slave experiences? Jacobs,
entire.

PAPER: Compare and contrast the experience of U.S. women and men in slavery

15 Nov. Abolition in the U.S. Reader--excerpts by Ransom and Sutch, Ch. 2 (pp.
14-39); Schafer (pp. 165-82)

17 Nov. Africa in the nineteenth century Miers and Kopytoff, Chs. 3, 5, 10, 14
(pp. 105-19, 133-53, 261-84, 367-88. Note--this is one week's readings

22 Nov. Africa--women, resistance and emancipation Reader--excerpts from
Robertson and Klein, Chs. 1, 11-13 -- pp. 3-15, 185-267)

PAPER: Compare and contrast reasons for, and the process of, abolition in the
U.S. and in West Africa

24 Nov NO CLASS -- catch up, get ahead!

30 Nov Asian perspectives Reader--excerpt from Watson, Chs. 9-11 (articles by
Watson, Turton. Morris, (pp. 223-308)



* * *

* * *

FINAL EXAM

For your take-home final you will read a portion of Roger Sawyer, Slavery in
the Twentieth century (3 chapters selected from among Chs. 4-10, whose titles
are: Apartheid, Exploitation of Children, Women, Debt Bondage and Serfdom,
Persecution of Tribal Minorities, Migrant Workers and Forced Labour.
Political/Penal Penal Slavery), and then relate the contemporary situation
described by Sawyer back to the historical one we studied to explain how you
think it arose. Concentrate on one country please. You are free to consult
other sources than assigned but it is not required. Your paper should reflect
sound knowledge of course readings. The final should be 4 to 6 pages in
length, typewritten, double-spaced, I inch margins. We will have a discussion
of Sawyer and the contemporary situation as part of the final at the scheduled
exam time when you hand in your final papers.

