### [History 195](index.html)

### NORTH AFRICA AND EUROPE

### Syllabus

###

* * *



### Course Description

### Requirements

### Texts

### Films

### Reference Works

### Schedule of Writing Assignments

### Research Paper

### Writing Portfolio

### Grading



#### COURSE DESCRIPTION

The two thousand miles of African coast from Casablanca to the shores of
Tripoli are barely known to most Americans, but for the last hundred and fifty
years they have been intimately linked to Europe. In this course, we will
consider the encounter of Europe and North Africa--the Maghreb (Morocco,
Algeria, Tunisia and Libya)--from the French assault on Algiers in 1830 up to
the present. The story we will study is one of extremes: violent wars of
conquest, palace intrigues, colonial projects, stilted attempts at
modernization, imperialist schemes, nationalist dreams, and a brutal war of
independence. Special attention will be given to the ways in which North
Africans and Europeans have thought about each other and this clash of
cultures in art, literature and film.

Since the early nineteenth century, North Africa has played a special role in
the European imagination. It has stood for the exotic, the picturesque, the
sensual, and the barbaric. This kind of imagining went hand in hand with a
vigorous campaign to dominate and colonize North Africa, an effort led by the
French, but common to much of western Europe. North Africans have thus been
forced to think about Europe. And they have done so in deeply ambivalent ways,
portraying Europe as home to violence and Enlightenment, greed and high
culture. One of the aims of this course will be to relate these issues of
culture and perception to the violence of this colonial history. Is there any
connection between Gerome's portraits of languid oriental beauties and the
French military campaign to dominate Algeria? Is there any contradiction in
the use of the French language by Maghrebi writers to articulate an anti-
French nationalist agenda? We will multiply such questions. But we shall also
seek to explore the aspects of the cultural encounter of North Africa and
Europe that cannot be reduced to violence or domination. What did Muhammad as-
Saffar (Moroccan scholar, emissary for the Sultan) find in his 1845-6 journey
to Paris? What did the French painter Delacroix find in his 1832 travels to
North Africa? We, as travelers in time and space, will follow them both in
order to uncover the worlds they inhabited.

This course is a writing course. It fulfills the English Composition Board
first-year requirement. The goal will be to learn how history is written and
to learn how to write about history. From the beginning, I insist that
students distinguish the argumentative essay from the report. Class sessions
and assignments are designed to help students recognize good, subtle, and
weighty arguments. A series of short writing assignments will cultivate the
varieties of writing that college-level history courses require. Students will
learn: how to research a topic; how to write about a secondary work of
history; how to develop an interpretation out of a primary text; how to read
for the assumptions or ideas that underlie an essay, a painting, a short
story. A longer paper will ask students to develop a historical interpretation
of a particular cultural artifact.

This course is: an introduction to the tumultuous history of colonial North
Africa; an introduction to the cultural history of colonialism; a practical
course on writing about history. It is also a discussion seminar. Aside from
occasional lectures offered for background information and your own
presentations, class sessions will consist of discussion of the works and
issues at hand. If this is going to be successful, it is essential that you do
the reading well and come to class with something to say: a question, a
comment, a disagreement, or some connection you have made.



#### REQUIREMENTS

  * Close and thoughtful reading of all assigned texts. 
  * Attendance, and more importantly, active participation at all class meetings. 
  * A series of weekly writing exercises: research and writing exercises, short response pieces, and in-class writing assignments. 
  * A series of formal writing assignments: three short papers (4 p.) and one longer research paper (8-10 p.) 
  * There is no final exam. However, there may be occasional in-class quizzes on the reading. 



#### TEXTS

The following texts are required reading for the course:

  * Assia Djebar, _Fantasia: An Algerian Cavalcade_. 
  * Richard Marius. _A Short Guide to Writing About History_. 
  * Coursepack of articles, excerpts, and documents. 

The books are available from Shaman Drum Books, the coursepack from Michigan
Document Service. All of these will be on reserve at the Undergraduate
library.



#### FILMS

There are two required films for the course.

  * "The Battle of Algiers" (Gillo Pontecorvo, Algeria/Italy, 1965, 123 min). In class, Sept. 10. 
  * "Door to the Sky" (Farida Ben Lyziad, Morocco, 1989, 107 min). Time and place to be arranged, Dec. 4. 

There will be an optional film showing at the end of the course.

  * "Hate" (Mathieu Kassovitz, France, 1995, 96 min). To be arranged. 



#### REFERENCE WORKS

The following are a few historical works that are useful reference for the
study of the Arab world, the Maghreb, and colonialism. These books are
available on reserve in the Undergraduate library.

  * Jamil Abun-Nasr. _A History of the Maghrib in the Islamic Period_. 
  * Winfried Baumgart. _Imperialism: The Idea and Reality of British and French Colonial Experience, 1880-1914_. 
  * Henri Brunschwig. _French Colonialism, 1817-1914: Myths and Realities_. 
  * Albert Hourani. _A History of the Arab Peoples_. 



#### SCHEDULE OF WRITING ASSIGNMENTS

NB: All writing exercises and papers are due on the scheduled date. Late
papers will only be accepted by special arrangement and they will be
penalized. I give the day of the week for those papers due outside of class.
Turn these in to my mailbox at the history department by 4 p.m.

Ex. # 1. Keywords. Define and analyze a key term (1 pp.) |

SEPT. 10  
---|---  
  
Ex. # 2. Close reading of a primary source (2 pp.) |

SEPT. 19  
  
**Paper # 1. Short Paper - On Fantasia (4 pp.)** |

**SEPT. 26**  
  
**Paper # 2. Short Paper &emdash; Interpreting a Primary Source (4 pp.)** |

**OCT. 15**  
  
**Paper # 3. Short Paper &emdash; Critique of a Secondary Source (4 pp.) ** |

**OCT. 31**  
  
Ex. # 3. Research proposal (1 p.) |

NOV. 11 (Mon.)  
  
Ex. # 4. Summary of your primary source and its historical context (2 pp.) |

NOV. 14  
  
Ex. # 5. Outline of your paper (2 pp.) |

NOV. 18  
  
Ex. # 6. Draft of final paper (6-8 pp.) |

NOV. 27 (Wed.)  
  
**Paper # 4 &emdash; Revised Final Paper (8-10 pp.)** |

**DEC. 9 (Mon.)**  
  
Ex. # 7. Self-evaluation (1-2 pp.) and turn in writing porfolio. |

DEC. 14 (Fri.)  
In addition, there will be occasional response pieces and in-class writing
assignments.



#### RESEARCH PAPER

In the last month of the course, you will prepare a short research project,
examining a single primary source or a single historical question. You may
choose to look deeper into something we've treated in class, or set off on
your own to apply what you've learned in class to something new. We will talk
about potential research topics all through the semester. A few possible
topics which might get you started thinking (and I will give you further
guidance as you focus your interests): Travel Accounts of North Africa
(Isabelle Eberhardt, for example); Films/Novels of the North African Immigrant
Experience ("Rai," "La Haine," Mehdi Charef's Tea in the Harem); Images of
North Africa in Hollywood Films ("Beau Geste"); North African and European
Musical Influences (Cheb Khaled and Rai Music).



#### WRITING PORTFOLIO

Keep all of the writing exercises and papers you do for this course, together
with my comments, in a writing portfolio. We will meet three times across the
term to discuss your writing portfolio.



#### GRADING

Your course grade will measure your effort and achievement in this course. The
following is offered as a rough guide: 70% of your grade is based on the
quality and completeness of your writing portfolio; 30% of your grade is based
on class discussion.

