### History 207 Winter 1996

* * *

### Updated 1/16

Jump to next week's reading by clicking here

* * *

## History 207: Materials, Early Modern World

During the early modern period, defined as extending from the 15th to the 18th
centuries, the level and intensity of contacts among different regions of the
world increased exponentially over earlier periods. Goods, people, forms of
dominion, and cultural ideas and values disseminated among or were imposed
upon others in an unprecedented fashion. While the industrial revolution and
the global imperialism that followed the early modern period transformed the
world, many of the contours of the contemporary scene, including the economic,
religious and ethnic framework of modern world politics, first took shape in
the period before 1800.  
  
The purpose of this course is to introduce students to the advanced study of
the early modern world. This requires an examination of several major
theoretical problems, a consideration of the models of analysis that are
currently in discussion (and in several cases, still evolving rapidly), and
the reading of exemplary studies that highlight certain characteristic themes
in the study of global history.  
  
The course will take place under the aegis of several governing questions.
During the quarter, I hope to maintain a website or emailing-list through
which we can maintain a running dialogue about these questions, and evolve
answers to them or transformations of their terms. (This project is a trial-
run of a proposed intercampus program in conceptualizing world history that
will begin next year.)  
  

* * *

Course requirements  

> 1\. Students are expected to read carefully the assigned books and other
works each week. For each of the major units of the course (I-VI below), each
student should submit/post a short **position paper** relating the week's
readings to the larger questions posed at the opening of the course (2-4
pages). Discussion of these position papers will be a continuing part of both
in-class and non-class portions of the course. Exact details will be
established during our first meeting.  
>  2\. During each class, all students are expected to engage actively in the
discussion as it proceeds.  
>  3\. Each student will choose one of the thematic topics discussed during
weeks 3-9 as the focus for further historiographical research. (Approximately
equal numbers of students are desirable for each of the themes). For the
assigned week, each student involved will produce an extended **bibliography**
of books, articles, review essays and reviews relevant to an aspect of the
theme at hand, and will produce a written **agenda** for discussion during the
class in question. These agendas will serve to organize class discussion of
the specific works assigned and the larger implications of the week's theme.
(As needed, the weekly assignment can be modified to reflect the responsible
students' investigations and results.)  
>  4\. At the end of the quarter, each student will write a
**historiographical essay** of approximately 12-15 pages that situates their
theme in the larger frameworks of the early modern world. As a rule, each
student's essay should consider at least two major works in addition to the
assigned books for the relevant week, along with relevant review essays and
reviews.

Scheduling note:  
  
Because there are two Monday holidays this quarter, we will need to rechedule
two meetings. One, with general consent, will take place during the Monday of
examination week. The second will take place during of Feb. 12.  
  

* * *

###  Weekly Readings

> This bibliography is subject to change in general as the course develops,
and many of the readings shown here are to be regarded as exemplary rather
than definitive

** Optional or supplemental items marked with asterisks  
  
_Readings subject to change in italics  
_

### I. World Systems Theory (Weeks 1-2)

#### Week 1:

Eric R. Wolf. Europe and the People without History (California: 1982), pp.
3-126.  
  
Marshall Hodgson,  "Hemispheric Interregional History as an Approach to World
History," Cahiers d'Histoire Mondiale. 1, 3 (1954), pp. 715-23. (A later
version of his thoughts are found in Hodgson's Rethinking World History
[Cambridge, 1993], esp. Essays 1, 3, 5, 6).  
  
Michael Geyer and Charles Bright, "World History in a Global Age," American
Historical Review, 100, 4 (1995), pp. 1034-1060.  
  
*William McNeill, "The Rise of the West after Twenty-Five Years," Journal of World History, 1, 1, (1990), pp. 1-21.  

#### Week 2:

Wallerstein, The Modern World System, Vol. I (1974)  
  
Andre Gunder Frank, "The World Economic System in Asia Before European
Hegemony," Historian, 56, 2 (1995), pp. 259-76.  
  
* **(NEW)** Steve Stern,  "Feudalism, Capitalism, and the World-System in the Perspective of Latin American and the Caribbean," in Frederick Cooper et al., Confronting Historical Paradigms: Peasants, Labor, and the Capitalist World System in Africa and Latin America, (Madison, 1993), pp. 23-83 **(Xerox available in course reserve box above student mail boxes)**  
  
*Thomas Shannon, An Introduction to the World-System Perspective, (a useful overview and introduction)  
  
*Janet Abu-Lughod, Before European Hegemony: The World-System, A.D. 1250-1350 (1989)  

### II. Colonial and imperial systems: (Weeks 3-4)

#### Week 3: "Empires" in the early modern period

  
Suggested readings on Songhay, Ottoman, Portuguese and Ming empires can be
found in the bibliographies.  

#### Week 4: The origins of colonial systems

Charles Verlinden, The Beginnings of Modern Colonization (1970)  
  
Nicholas Canny, Kingdom and Colony: Ireland in the Atlantic World, 1500-1800
(1988)  
  
*George Brooks, Landlords and Strangers: Ecology, Society and Trade in Western Africa, 1000-1630 (1993)  
  
*Nicholas Canny and Anthony Pagden, eds., Colonial Identity in the Atlantic World, 1500-1800, (1987)  
  
*Felipe Fern andez-Armesto, Before Columbus: Exploration and Colonization from the Mediterranean to the Atlantic, 1229-1492 (1987)  

### III. Merchant Capitalism (Week 5)

James Tracy, ed. The Rise of Merchant Empires: Long-Distance Trade in the
Early Modern World, 1350-1750 (1990)  
  
*Jonathan Israel, Dutch Primacy in World Trade (1989)  
  
*Philip Curtin, Cross Cultural Trade in World History, (1984)  

### IV. Labor systems and their consequences (Weeks 6-7)

#### Week 6: Comparative labor systems (with Rob Patch)

Stuart Schwartz, Sugar Plantations in the Formation of Brazilian Society:
Bahia, 1550-1835  
  
Steve Stern, Peru's Indian peoples and the challenge of Spanish conquest  

#### Week 7: Effects of labor systems analyzed in terms of gender

_Carole Shammas, "Black Women's Work and the Evolution of Plantation Society
in Virginia," Labor History, 26, 1 (1985): 5-28.  
  
Marietta Morrissey, "Women's Work, Family Formation and Reproduction among
Caribbean Slaves," Review [Fernand Braudel Center] 9, 3 (1986), pp. 339-67.  
  
Ira Berlin and Philip D. Morgan, eds., articles on women in Cultivation and
Culture (1993)  
  
Steve Stern, The Secret History of Gender (1995) (late colonial Mexico)  
_

### V. Religion and cultural contact (Weeks 8-9)

#### Week 8: Christianization and its discontents

Inga Clendinnen, Ambivalent Conquests: Maya and Spaniard in Yucatan, 1517-1570
(1987)  
  
John Thornton, "The development of the African Catholic Church in the Kingdom
of Kongo, 1491-1750," _Journal of African History,_ 25 (1984).  
  
John Thornton,  "On the Trail of Voodoo: African Christianity in Africa and
the Americas," _The Americas,_ 44, (1988).  
  
John Thornton,  "Perspective on African Christianity," in _Race, Discourse,
and the Origin of the Americas:A New World View,_ eds. V. Lawrence and R.
Nettleford, (Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1995), pp. 169-98.  
  
*Jan Vansina,  "The Kongo Kingdom and its Neighbors," in _General History of Africa, Vol. V: Africa from the Sixteenth to the Eighteenth Century,_ ed. B. A. Ogot, (Berkeley and Paris, 1992).   

#### Week 9: Interpreting culture contact

Marshall Sahlins, Historical Metaphors and Mythical Realities: Structure in
the Early History of the Sandwich Islands (1981)  
  
Gananath Obeyesekere, The apotheosis of Captain Cook: European mythmaking in
the Pacific (1992)  
  
*Sahlins, Marhall, How  "Natives" Think (1995) [a precis of his views in "How natives think," Times Literary Supplement, June 2, 1995, No. 4809, pp. 12-13.]  
  
*Clifford Geertz, "Culture War", New York Review of Books, 42, 19 (1995), pp. 4-6.  
  
*Inga Clendinnen, "Cortes, Signs, and the Conquest of Mexico," in Anthony Grafton and Ann Blair, eds., The Transmission of Culture in Early Modern Europe, (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1990), pp. 87-130.  

### VI. The polemics of world history (Week 10)

J. M. Blaut, 1492  
  
Reviews of Blaut  
  
*Edward Said, Orientalism (1978); _Michael Sprinker, ed., Edward Said : a critical reader (1992) PN51 .E39 1992_  
  
*Tzvetan Todorov, The conquest of America (1984)  
  
*James Axtell,  "The Moral Significance of 1492," Historian, 56, 1 (1993), pp. 17-28  
  

