
    HI 400-01 TOPICS IN EUROPEAN HISTORY: SEVENTEENTH CENTURY EUROPE--
                          POLITICS AND IDEAS
    
    BRIDGEWATER STATE COLLEGE                     FALL SEMESTER 1996
    HARRINGTON 33                                 MWF NOON-12:50 P.M.
    
    INSTRUCTOR: Dr. Luci Fortunato De Lisle
    office hours:  MWF 11-noon, Tillinghast 219
    telephone: (508) 697-1388 ext. 2412
    e-mail: lfortunato@bridgew.edu
    
    REQUIRED CLASS TEXTS:
    Munck, Thomas. Seventeenth Century Europe: State Conflict and
         Social Order in Europe 1598-1700.  New York: St. Martin's
         Press, 1989.
    Rabb, Theodore K. The Struggle for Stability in Early Modern
         Europe.  New York: Oxford University Press, 1975.
    von Grimmelshausen, Hans Jacob Christoffel, The Adventures of
         a Simpleton. Trans. Walter Wallich.  New York: Frederick
         Ungar, 1995.
    
    
    DUE DATE  CLASS TOPIC                    ...ASSIGNMENT DUE
    
    SETTING THE STAGE: THE GENERAL CONTEXT OF 17TH-CENTURY EUROPE
    W 9/4   Historical Geography and Introduction to
            Historiographical issues of the 17th century
    
    F 9/6   The general nature of economics, society, politics,
            religion and intellectual life in 17th-century 
            Europe . . . [reread the chapters in a Western
            Civilization text which treat the seventeenth century
            to get an overview/review quickly--pay special attention
            to the 30 Years War.] Begin reading Munck chapters 3, 4,
            5, 6, and 8
    
    M 9/9   The general picture continued . . . finish reading 
            Munck chapters 3, 4, 5, 6, 8
    
    POLITICS AND WAR ON THE CONTINENT TO CA. 1660
    W 9/11  Spain and its Empire on Top--and its relative decline 
            . . . Munck Ch. 2 pp. 49-56, Ch. 5 pp. 155-156, Ch. 7
            pp. 208-212
    
    F 9/13  Spain continued . . . PRESENTATION #1____________________
    
    M 9/16  The Dutch Republic--the quest for independence and a
            Golden Age . . .Munck Ch. 4 pp. 121-128, Ch. 7 pp. 232
            -236,  Ch. 8 pp. 253-254, 
    
    W 9/18  The Dutch continued . . . PRESENTATION #2________________
    
    F 9/20  The Holy Roman Empire and Denmark . . . Ch. 1 pp. 1-7,
            Ch. 2 pp. 62-66, Ch. 5 pp. 158-161, Ch. 8 pp. 246-253 
         
    M 9/23  Sweden becomes a great power . . .Munck Ch. 2 pp. 56-62, 
            Ch, 8 pp. 161[bottom]-162; Ch. 7 pp. 228-232
            PRESENTATION #3_______________________________
    
    W 9/25  France poised to tip the balance of power--from Henry IV
            through  Louis XIII . . . Munck Ch. 2 pp. 31-49, Ch. 5
            pp. 148-155, Ch. 7 pp. 212-216,
    
    F 9/27  NO CLASS-FALL CONVOCATION
    
    M 9/30  France through mid-century and crises continued . . . 
            PRESENTATION #4____________________________
    
    W 10/2  The 30 Years War . . . Munck, Ch. 1 pp. 7-31; begin
            reading Grimmelshausen, The Adventures of a Simpleton
    
    F 10/4  The 30 Years War continued . . . [keep reading
            Grimmelshausen] PRESENTATION #5______________________
    
    M 10/7  Discussion of Grimmelshausen, The Adventures of a
            Simpleton . . . ESSAY DUE
    
    ACROSS THE CHANNEL
    W 10/9  From Stuart England to Civil War . . .Munck Ch. 2 pp. 70-
            80, Ch. 5 pp. 156[middle]-158
    
    F 10/11 Civil War and its Consequences . . . Munck Ch. 7 pp. 216
            -228, Ch. 8 pp. 254-256 PRESENTATION #6__________________
    
    M 10/14 NO CLASSES--COLUMBUS DAY
    
    W 10/16 Politics and Culture Stuart to Restoration England . . .
            Munck Ch. 11 pp. 359-365, Ch. 12 pp. 377-382
            PRESENTATION #7___________________________
    
    F 10/18 MID-SEMESTER EXAMINATION
    
    HISTORIOGRAPHY AND CRISIS THEORY
    M 10/21 Assessing and Interpreting what we've studied to date 
            . . . Rabb chapters 1-8
    
    W 10/23  Looking forward--establishing a context for cultural and
             intellectual topics . . . Rabb chapters 9-end ESSAY DUE
    
    EUROPEAN POLITICS AND CULTURE 1660-1715
    F 10/25 MittelEuropa--the Hapsburgs and the Ottoman threat. . .
            Munch Ch. 4 pp. 132-136, Ch. 8 pp. 246-253
            PRESENTATION #8                                      
    
    M 10/28  The Hohenzollerns and the beginnings of Prussia. . .
             Munck pp. 355-57 PRESENTATION #9_____________________
    
    W 10/30  Russia and eastern Europe . . .Munck Ch. 4 pp. 128-132, 
             Ch. 5 pp. 162-164, Ch. 7 203-208, Ch. 8 242-249, 
             Ch. 12 391-396 PRESENTATION #9_________________________
    
    F 11/1  French Hegemony in the Age of Louis XIV . . .Munck Ch. 11
    pp. 340-352 and 365-370, Ch. 12 pp. 371-337 and pp. 382-391
    
    M 11/3  Louis XIV and the Age of Political and Cultural Grandeur
            . . . PRESENTATION # 10_____________________________
    
    BELIEFS, MENTALITES, AND CULTURAL EXPRESSION--QUESTIONS OF
    NATURE, SOCIETY, HUMANS, GOD, AND HISTORY 
    W 11/6  Intellectual skepticism and the witch craze 
            . . . Munck  Ch. 9 pp. 269-277; primary source 
            handouts
    
    F 11/8  Developments and Issues in the Scientific Revolution
            . . . Munck Ch. 9 pp. 294-299 [also please begin reading
            and have completed the library reserve Franklin Baumer,
            Modern European Thought pp. 26-137 by M 11/18];
            primary source handouts
            
    M 11/11 NO CLASS--VETERANS' DAY
    
    W 11/13 Scientific Revolution continued . . .primary
            source handouts; PRESENTATION #1_________________________
    
    F 11/15 NO CLASS [conference]
    
    M 11/18 The Revolution in Philosophy . . .primary source
            handouts; PRESENTATION #2__________________________
    
    W 11/20 Religious thought and controversies . . .Munck Ch. 9 
            pp. 277-285; primary source handouts;
            PRESENTATION #3_____________________________
    
    F 11/22 Utopian writings and Poiltical theory . . . Munck Ch. 9
            pp. 299-304; primary source handouts;
            PRESENTATION #4_________________________
    
    M 11/25 Political thought continued . . . primary source
            handouts; PRESENTATION  #5___________________________
    
    W 11/27 Trends and questions in poetry and prose . . . Munck
            Ch. 10 [read all as an overview] and begin library
            reserve reading: Wylie Sypher, Four Stages of Renaissance
            Style: Transformations in Art and Literature 1400-1700
            pp. 1-36 and 100-297. Also primary source handouts;
            PRESENTATION #6__________________________   
    
    F 11/29  NO CLASS--THANKSGIVING BREAK
    
    M 12/2  Drama . . . primary source handouts; PRESENTATION
            #7______________________
    
    W 12/4  Music, Opera and Spectacle . . .primary source
            handouts; PRESENTATION #8___________________________
    
    F 12/6  Fine Arts--Painting and Sculpture . . .  primary
            source handouts; PRESENTATION #9 ______________________
    
    M 12/9  Ecclesiastical and State Architecture . . .  primary
            source handouts; PRESENTATION #10_______________________ 
    
    W 12/11 Wrap-up discussion on the Political and Cultural 
            Trends in 17th-Century Europe . . . focus on Sypher,
            Four Stages of Renaissance Style 
    
    The syllabus for this topics course has been designed to extract
    some of the main areas of historical interest and debate in the
    POLITICAL and INTELLECTUAL HISTORY of seventeenth-century Europe. 
    As such it does not pretend to offer any comprehensive "coverage"
    of all aspects of the history of the era.  The course, too, is
    heavily weighted in considering western and central continental
    European History with some more limited consideration of the
    British Isles, eastern Europe, Russia and the Ottoman Empire. 
    Its approach to intellectual history, further, is shaped largely
    by historigraphical considerations stemming from "crisis theory"
    and the cultural manifestations of seventeenth-century politics
    through the absolutism (the "Age of Grandeur") of Louis XIV.  The
    "culture" considered will generally be "high culture" ranging
    across developments in science, philosophy, political theory,
    religious beliefs, music, drama, literature, the fine arts and
    architecture.  These cultural aspects will be touched upon
    briefly as they pertain to the individual states considered in
    the earlier part of the course but will be taken up as topics
    themselves later in the course to help develop a more
    comprehensive picture of the complexities and currents of thought
    in this crucial century of change which may well mark the key
    transitional period from "medieval" to "modern".  The
    chronological framework adopted for the course is that of a "long
    seventeenth century divided roughly into two continental phases
    the first extending to about 1660, the second to 1715 using dates
    in political history for our guideposts.
    
    THE CLASS AND REQUIREMENTS
    CLASS DISCUSSIONS AND READINGS: This class will be conducted as a
    colloquium with a mixture of lectures, student presentations and
    discussions.  Informed, reflective and substantive contributions
    are assumed on a daily basis--COME TO CLASS PREPARED AND READY TO
    PARTICIPATE.
    
    EXAMINATIONS:  There will be two exams--a mid-term and a final
    both of which will be written in class. [20% each=40%]
    
    PRESENTATIONS: You will be responsible for TWO formal
    presentations as a "specialist" on one political topic and one
    cultural question or primary source.  Presentations should last
    approximately 15 minutes and include appropriate handouts,
    visuals, recordings, graphs, outlines, etc.  Additionally a one-
    two page summary should be handed in on the day of each
    presentation; this should include a one-two paragraph thesis
    synopsis of your presentation; a formal outline and a
    bibliography.  You should plan to confer with me as soon as
    possible once your presentation countries and cultural topics
    have been determined to narrow down and focus your presentation
    selection. [10% each=20%]
    
    ESSAYS: You will write two reflective essays on questions which
    will be provided on the picaresque novel, The Adventures of a
    Simpleton by von Grimmelshausen and on the historiography of
    crisis theory. [10% each=20%]
    
    RESEARCH PAPER:  Finally, you will have the opportunity to write
    an 8-10 page research paper [double spaced] on a question of your
    choice within the framework of the course.  Again, I urge you to
    come to talk with me as soon as possible about your paper; [I
    shall maintain veto power over any topic which I feel will lead
    you down a blind alley or which does not match the expectations
    of an upper-level undergraduate course!] [20%]
    
    --Your RESEACH PAPER SHOULD INCLUDE:
    1.  A clear and focused THESIS STATEMENT presented near the
    beginning of the paper.
    2. Persuasive argumentation and solid use and analysis of
    evidence from a variety of kinds of sources and a strong
    conclusion.
    3.  Your bibliography/works cited list should include a minimum
    of ONE of each of the following kinds of sources [you may
    certainly have many more if you'd like!] appropriately selected
    and incorporated into your text.
    4.  Please use Turabian as your style manual.  You may use
    endnotes in place of footnotes.  Take every care to be accurate
    and to follow correct format.  If I have a question about a
    citation, I may ask you to produce the source to check it.   
    
    GRADING RUBRIC SUMMARY:
    EXAMINATIONS  [2 @ 20% each]= 40%
    PRESENTATIONS [2 @ 10% each]= 20%
    ESSAYS        [2 @ 10% each]= 20% 
    RESEARCH PAPER ------------ = 20%
    ________________________________
    TOTAL                         100% [+ for outstanding 
                                        class participation]  
    ************************************************************
    SOME SUGGESTIONS FOR SUPPLEMENTARY READING ON SYLLABUS TOPICS
    [The list which follows is NOT intended to be comprehensive but
    should serve only as an preliminary menu to get you started; it
    merely points you to a number of books readily available in BSC's
    library.  You should consult the bibliography at the back of your
    Munck text for a more extensive and thorough listing.  I have not
    listed journal articles as these will be dictated by your
    presentation and research paper topic selections.]
    
    SPAIN AND EMPIRE    
    CB 401 E43 J.H. Elliott, The Old World and the New, 1492-1650
    DC 123.9 R5 E44 J.H. Elliott, Richelieu and Olivares
    DP 171 D6513  Antonio Ortiz, The Golden Age of Spain 1516-1659  
    DP 171 S7 R.A. Stradling, Europe and the Decline of Spain
    DP 171 E4  J.H. Elliott, Imperial Spain
    DP 171 L 92 1981 volume 2. John Lynch, Spain under the Hapsburgs
    DP 184 D3  R. Trevor Davies, Spain in Decline
    
    THE NETHERLANDS
    DJ 158 S32  Simon Shama, The Embarassment of Riches
    DJ 401 H6 P75 Holland and the Dutch Republic
    ND 646 H3 Haak, The Golden Age, Dutch Painters of the
                    Seventeenth Century
    
    SWEDEN
    DL 701 R 63  Michael Roberts, The Swedish Imperial Experience
    DL 706 R 76  Michael Roberts, Gustavus Adolphus
    DL 719 M 35  Georgina Masson, Queen Christina
    DL 719 R6  Michael Roberts, ed. Sweden's Age of Greatness 16632
               -1718
    
    FRANCE [through Louis XIII]
    DC 123 B66 Richard Bonney, Society and Government in France Under
               Richelieu and Mazarin 1624-1661
    DC 123 T313 Victor Tapie, France in the Ae of Louis XIII and
                Richelieu
    DC 123.9 R5 A84  Achincloss, Richelieu
    DC 123.9 R5 B43  Bergin, Cardinal Richelieu
    DC 123.9 R5 E44 J.H. Elliott, Richelieu and Olivares
    
    ENGLAND
    [BSC's library holds a treasure trove of books on British history
    from the Stuart period through the Restoration era; begin by
    consulting books on the shelves with call numbers from DA 370 to
    DA 480.]
    
    MITTELEUROPA AND THE OTTOMANS [useful books here will depend upon
    presentation topic focus and may be found in a variety of places
    listed under the dynasties--eg. Hapsburgs/Hohenzollerns--or even
    by more modern nation names--eg. Austria, Prussia, Hungary etc.--
    or by empire designation--eg. Holy Roman Empire/Ottoman Empire.]
    DB 36.1 C7 Edward Crankshaw, The Habsburgs
    
    RUSSIA
    DK 114 K573  V.O. Klinchevsky, A Course in Russian History: The
                 17th Century
    DK 113.2 D84 Paul Dukes, The Making of Russian Absolutism 1613
                 -1801
    DK 131 M 28 Robert Massie, Peter the Great
    
    FRANCE IN THE AGE OF LOUIS XIV
    DC 129 is the general call number for a large selection of
            biographies of Louis XIV
    DC 130 S2 A3 1910 3 vols. [St. Simon] Memoirs of the Courts of
                 Europe: Louis XIV and his Court
    DC 130 O7 A4 [Liselotte von der Pfalz] A Woman's Life in the
                  Court of the Sun King
    N 6410 T 313 Victor Tapie, The Age of Grandeur
    N 6844 B6 1970  Art and Architecture in France 1500-1700
    
    GENERAL BOOKS ON THOUGHT AND CULTURE
    ***N6370 .S95  Wylie Sypher, Four Stages of Renaissance Style:
                   Transformations in Art and Literature 1400-1700
                  [two copies of this book are ON RESERVE in the
                   library for your class; read especially pp. 1-36
                   and parts 2, 3, and 4 headed "Mannerism",    
                   "Baroque" and "Late-Baroque"].
    B791 .B36 1977 Franklin Baumer, Modern European Thought
                  [chapter 2]
    CB 401 S56 Peter Skrine, The Baroque
    D273.5 .H32 1969 Paul Hazard, The European Mind (1680-1715)
    

