## ANT 430/630 HISTORY OF ANTHROPOLOGY

PALMER, FALL, 1999

10:00 TR, WRI 203

Office Hours: TR 3:50-4:45, F 10:30-11:30 and by appointment

Teaching Assistant: Anja Vogel, offfice hours 10:30-1:00 MW, WRI 304C.

(This syllabus is also available at http://www.nevada.edu/~gbp)

### GOALS

Anthropology has a perspective that is unique among the social sciences. In
this course we discover this perspective by studying the thinking of prominent
anthropologists in the 19th and 20th Centuries. The historical approach
reveals how the anthropological perspective has evolved and how it has come to
assume its present configuration as a constellation of diverse approaches. We
will also examine intellectual conflicts in the form of major issues that have
riven the field, particularly those differences in American, English and
French approaches and the struggle between positivists and postmodernists.
Anthropology itself has been shaped by ethnicity and gender, so we will
examine differences between male and female anthropologists. Finally, we will
attempt to discover where anthropology fits in relation to other fields of
scholarship. What part is science, what part humanism? What do we owe to
sociology, psychology, and biology?

### REQUIRED READINGS

  * Mcgee, R. Jon and Richard L. Warms. 1996. Anthropological Theory: An Introductory History. Mayfield.
  * Orans, Martin, Not Even Wrong: Margaret Mead, Derek Freeman, and the Samoans. Chandler and Sharp Publishers, Inc. 1996.
  * Mead, Margaret. 1971. Coming of Age in Samoa: A Psychological Study of Primitive Youth for Western Civilization. Morrow, William & Company.

### ANT 630, grad students only; consider purchasing

  * Bohannon, Paul. 1988. High Points in Anthropology. 2nd Ed. Alfred A. Knopf.
  * Erickson, Paul A. 1998. A History of Anthropological Theory. Broadview.

### ASSIGNMENTS: CHAPTER SQUIBS

The weekly short papers are what I call "squibs". They should be typed and
double-spaced. The MAXIMUM length is four pages, no minimum. The papers are
simply evaluated on the basis of how well they respond to the question or
problem within this limit. In the upper left hand corner include just the
following information:

Your Name  
McGee & Warms, pp. 5-40 (or whatever) (It is important to include the page
numbers.)  
Date  
ANT 430 (or 630)

You may be able to answer most of the questions posed to you by reading the
introductory chapter for each week, but you can improve your papers (not to
mention your class discussion) by including specifics and even short quotes
(cited by page) from the assigned chapters.

Further commentary on the readings (or class discussions, lectures, and tapes)
is welcome. It may be almost anything, such as why the anthropologist's ideas
are right or wrong, how the anthropologist set the field on the right or wrong
path, how the author of your text misrepresented the anthropologist, or why he
should have been more critical, how the anthropologist relates to other fields
of knowledge or to history, or why you find the anthropologist's ideas
particularly difficult to understand (if you choose this topic, analyze your
own difficulties closely, finding the place in the text where you began to
find yourself lost).

### ASSIGNMENTS: RESEARCH PAPERS

Those seeking an "A" grade and graduate students must write a research paper.
Others may do so out of interest or to improve their grades. The research
paper is not required for undergraduates. A paper may be a study of an
anthropologist or it may be a study of an issue. The paper must be 10-15 pages
in length (grads should write longer papers) and should include information
from sources (journal articles and books) not read in class. Materials from
the internet should be used only as a means of discovering published materials
or to liven up a paper. They may not be used as the basis for the substance of
a paper because materials published on the internet do not yet meet normal
scientific standards. A bibliography will be provided. Use primary sources
(written by the subject him/herself) as much as possible. Try to get a draft
ready by mid-term so that I can give you commentary and editing suggestions.
You must let me know your topic by mid-term so that I can schedule you for a 5
to 10 minute presentation which will take place near the end of the semester.
If you don't have a topic by mid-term you will not be eligible to write a
research paper. If you are an anthropology major (or even perhaps if you are
not), you should write your paper with an eye toward publication. Russ Rader
published his paper for this class in the 1998 Journal of California
Anthropology. It is posted in the case outside the anthropology department.

### GRADING

Grades will be based on the chapter squibs, research papers, attendance, and
contributions to class discussions. In my experience, people vary greatly in
their strengths and weaknesses, so I see no point in assigning a certain
number of points to each category.

### SCHEDULE OF READINGS, TAPES

Sept 2, Read McGee & Warms, pp. 5-40; first squib due; topic: If Spencer and
Tylor could see contemporary American life and culture, how would they explain
it (or some aspect of it)? Maximum 4 pages.

Sept 7, Tape: Franz Boas [GN 21 B62 F7];

Sept 9 Read McGee & Warms, pp. 41-82; write squib comparing ideas of Morgan to
those of Marx or Freud. Tape Franz Boas: The Shackles of Tradition [GN 21
B56].

Sept 16 Read McGee & Warms, pp. 83-127; write squib on how history and the
individual are included or not included in theories of Durkheim, Mauss &
Weber, compared to 19th century evolutionists.

Sept 23 Read McGee & Warms, pp. 128-153; assume that Boas, Kroeber, and Radin
are teaching here in the department of anthropology at UNLV. How would each
explain contemporary American life and culture (or some aspect of it)? Maximum
4 pages.

Sept 28 Tape: Off the Verandah. [Bronislaw Malinowski] [GN 21 M25 O33].

Sept 30 Read McGee & Warms, pp. 154-201; Write a squib comparing the British
anthropologists Malinowski, Radcliffe-Brown, and Evans-Pritchard to their
American contemporaries Boas, Kroeber, and Radin. Why do you think the British
and Americans arrived at such different approaches to understanding people? If
you were applying to graduate school in the 1920s or 1930s, which author would
you chose to study with, and why? Tape: Sir Edward Evans-Pritchard: Strange
Beliefs [GN 21 E93 S77]

Oct 5 Tape: Tape: Margaret Mead:Coming of Age [GN 21 M36 C64]

Oct 7 Read McGee & Warms, pp. 202-214; Mead, Ch I-III; Orans, Introduction &
Ch 1-2. Write a squib that discusses how the theories of anthropology may be
affected by the gender of the theoreticians. It might be particularly useful
to compare Benedict and Mead to Boas, Kroeber, and Lowie because Benedict and
Mead were students of Boas.

Oct 12 Tape: Margaret Mead and Samoa [GN 671 S2 M3];

Oct 14 Read Mead, Ch VII, XI, X; Orans, Ch 3-5; Write a squib discussing your
views of the controversy over the work of Margaret Mead.

Oct 19 Tape: Anthropology on Trial [GN 345 A54 1984b]

Oct 21 Read Mead Ch XI, XIII; Orans, Ch 6-9. Write a squib discussing your
views of the controversy over the work of Margaret Mead, including some
discussion of how your views have evolved since last week.

Oct 28 Read McGee & Warms, pp. 221-257. Write a squib in which you discuss
what the ideas of Steward and White owe to those of Morgan and Marx and how
the two 20th century theorists differ from the two 19th century ones.

Nov 4 Read McGee & Warms, pp. 267-295. Write a squib in which you use the
ideas of Fried and Harris to explain the evolution of the city of Las Vegas.

Nov 9 Read McGee & Warms, pp. 310-335. Write a squib in which you discuss how
the ideas of Levi-Strauss fit into the field of anthropology and how they
change the picture that we have been developing of human culture and the
individual.

Nov 16 Read McGee & Warms, pp. 345-366. Do one of the following: (1) Find a
friend who speaks another language, preferably NOT a common European language
(Spanish, French, German, etc.) and record as many terms for colors as you
can, along with exact meanings of there are any beyond the color itself (ex.
"bone white"); (2) Find a child 4 years old or younger and elicit color terms
by showing the child objects of different colors. Record the terms. (3) Find a
dictionary of another language and copy all of the color terms that you can
find along with exact meanings. (4) Do (1) with anybody at all. In all of
these, please follow the following convention: Underline or italicize the term
itself and put the gloss in single quotes, as in the following example: blond
'light yellow' a color that applies only to hair or wood. You will be asked to
hand in your list of terms, along with your comments on what the list says
about the color categories of your consultant or the language you studied.

Nov 23 Read McGee & Warms, pp. 367-429. Write a squib in which you apply the
thinking of Edward Wilson and Jerome Barkow to the feminist critique as
presented by Slocum, Ortner and Llewelyn-Davies. Are these two groups working
together or at cross purposes? Should they be allies or mortal enemies?

Dec 2 Read McGee & Warms, pp. 430-479. Write a squib comparing the ideas of
Douglas, Turner, and Geertz to those of Levi-Strauss.

Dec 9 Read McGee & Warms, pp. 480-512. Write a squib on what post-modernism
can do for anthropology. Tape: Anthropology and the Future [GN 33.6 A57]

Dec 14, 10:10 AM. Final Exam. Bring blue-books sufficient for two hours. This
will be an open-book, open-note exam. It's contribution to your record will be
approximately 10% (unless someone unexpectedly demonstrates complete ignorance
of the topic or fails to show at all, in which case the effect will be
decisive).

### Suggested Topics for Research papers:

The following is a list of anthropologists and linguists (in roughly
chronological order) from which you may wish to choose in deciding on a topic
for your paper. This is just to give you ideas; it is not necessary to choose
from this list:

Lewis Henry Morgan (cultural, Iroquois)

Edward Burnett Tylor (cultural, Mesoamerica)

Franz Boas (cultural/linguistic/physical/psychological/North America/racism)

Alfred Kroeber (cultural/linguistic/North America)

Carlton Coon (physical anthropology, human evolution)

Elsie Clews Parsons (cultural)

Margaret Mead (cultural/psychological/Melanesia/Polynesia/Bali)

Gregory Bateson (cultural/cybernetics/New Guinea)

Edward Sapir (linguistics/cultural/North America)

Benjamin Whorf (linguistics/North America)

Bronislaw Malinowski (cultural/Trobriand Islands)

Melville Herskovits (cultural/Africa)

Ashley Montagu (physical/gender)

Eleanore B. Leacock (cultural/North America)

Julian Steward (cultural/ecological/American Indians)

Elman Service (cultural/political evolution)

Leslie White (cultural evolution)

Paul Bohannon (economic anthropology/social structure)

Noam Chomsky (linguistics)

Clifford Geertz (cultural/interpretive/symbolic)

Joseph Greenberg (linguistic ant./Africa/North America)

Raul Narroll (cultural/statistical)

George P. Murdock (cultural/statistical/Africa)

John Whiting (psychological, severe rites of initiation)

Beatrice Whiting (psychological, witchcraft and social control)

Irvin Child (psychological)

Luther Gerlach (political movements/Africa/U.S., Black Power)

James Gibbs (legal, psychological/Africa/U.S.)

Hugo Nuttini (political/Project Camelot/CIA/South America)

Robert Carneiro (archaeology/South America)

Robert Mc. Adams (archaeology/Middle East)

Kent Flannery (archaeology/Middle East/how states get too complicated)

Eric Wolf (cultural/peasants/revolution/Mexico)

Paul Friedrich (linguistics/poetry/revolution/Tarascan/Mexico)

Claude Levi-Strauss (cultural/symbolic/South America/raw and cooked)

Melford Spiro (cultural/symbolic/psychological/Israeli kibbutz/Bali)

Ward Goodenough (cultural/cognitive/Polynesia)

Anthony Wallace (psychological/religion/ethnoscience/Iroquois)

Charles Frake (ethnoscience, Philippines)

Michael Agar (ethnoscience, heroin addiction, Germany)

Marvin Harris (cultural/history/theory/racism/Yanomamo)

Cecil Brown (cognitive/linguistic/plant & anim. terms)

Brent Berlin (cognitive/linguistic/color terms/Mexico)

George Stocking (history of anthropology)

Marshall Sahlins (cultural/political/symbolic/economic/Polynesia)

Paul Kay (cognitive/linguistic/color terms)

Don Brown (cultural universals)

Dell Hymes (linguistics/discourse/poetry/Sahaptian)

Victor Turner (symbolic/postmodernism/Africa)

Anna Wierzbicka (linguistics/Slavic languages)

George Lakoff (linguistics/metaphor/cognition)

Laura Nader (law/functionalism/Mexico/U.S.)

George Marcus (cultural/interpretive/theory/U.S.)

James Clifford (cultural/interpretive/history of ant.)

Roy D'Andrade (cognitive/U.S.)

Roger Keesing (linguistic/cultural/cognitive/Polynesia)

Donald Johanson (physical/australopithecines)

Richard Shweder (psychological/interpretive/India)

Catherine Lutz (interpretive/emotions/Pacific)

Lila Abu-Lughod (interpretive/emotions/poetry/Bedouin)

Claudia Strauss (cognitive/U.S.)

Naomi Quinn (cognitive/marriage/U.S.)

Helen Fisher (physical/love)

Michael Silverstein (linguistic anthropology/Sahaptin - former winner of
MacArthur award)

Nancy Scheper-Hugues (critical medical anthropology)

Eleanore-Ochs (linguistic anthropology/Samoa - winner of MacArthur award,
1999)

Alessandro Duranti (linguistic anthropology/Samoa)

Stephen Feld (ethnomusicology, New Guinea)

or anyone who wrote a chapter in your textbook

### Sources:

Consult the indices of the pertinent anthropological journals from among the
following: American Anthropologist, American Ethnologist, Current Anthropology
(a particularly good source for debates over issues), Journal of Linguistic
Anthropology, Linguistics, American Antiquity, Ethnology, Man (Journal of the
Royal Anthropological Institute), Anthropological Linguistics, Southwestern
Journal of Anthropology, Human Organization, Journal of Economic Development
and Cultural Change, Science, Journal of American Folklore, Scientific
American, Transactions of the New York Academy of Sciences, Transactions of
the American Philosophical Society, American Journal of Sociology, Anthropos,
Daedalus, Proceedings of the American Association for the Advancement of
Science.

If your subject is not too recent, you may find information in one of the
following:

Helm, June, ed. (1966) Pioneers of American Anthropology. U. of Washington Pr.
[Lurie, Fletcher, Parsons, Densmore, etc.]

Kuper, Adam (1995) Anthropology and Anthropologists. Routledge. [British
anthropology]

Langness, L. L. (1987) The Study of Culture. Chandler and Sharp.

Lowie, R. H. (1937) The History of Ethnological Theory. HRW.

Parezo, Nancy (ed.) (1993) Hidden Scholars: Women Anthropologists and the
Native American Southwest.

Penniman, T.K. (1935) A Hundred Years of Anthropology. London: Duckworth.

Stocking, G. W. (1968) Race, Culture, and Evolution: Essays in the History of
Anthropology. Free Press.

Stocking, G. W. (1992) The Ethnographer's Magic and Other Essays in the
History of Anthropology. U. of Wisconsin Press.

Voget, F. (1975) A History of Ethnology. HRW. .

Also, check computer listings in library, humanities and social sciences
indexes on compact disk in library reference section (2nd fl, old library),
and, for older materials, the card catalog. The library computer can now tap
into California systems as well, so learn how to do that. Scan the
bibliographies of the sources that you find.

### DISABILITIES

If you have a documented disability that requires assistance, you will need to
go to the Disability Resource Center (DRC) for coordination in your academic
accommodations. The DRC is located in the Reynolds Student Services Center rm
137. The DRC phone is 895-0866 or TDD 895-0652.

TOP | [ANTHROPOLOGY/ETHNIC STUDIES](http://www.nscee.edu/ant) |
[UNLV](http://www.unlv.edu)  
---|---|---

