

SURVEY OF ROMAN HISTORY

History/Classics 205

Spring 2002



Prof. Alison Futrell

Office hours: W 12-2 & by appt.

Soc Sci 131/626-8428

[afutrell@u.arizona.edu](mailto:afutrell@u.arizona.edu)



MWF 11:00-11:50, Soc Sci 206

http://www.u.arizona.edu/~afutrell



[Reader: Jerry Pierce](jerryinfo02.html)

[jpierce@u.arizona.edu](mailto:jpierce@u.arizona.edu)







This course offers a chronological survey of Roman History from the
prehistoric settlements in the area of the Seven Hills to the deterioration of
the western Empire in the fifth century A.D. The main goal is to achieve a
greater awareness of the impact of Roman civilization, how the Romans
negotiated a cohesive empire within the diversity of the ancient Mediterranean
area and how that achievement has been evaluated, in antiquity and in the
modern world. Another goal is the acquisition of greater skill in the tasks of
the historian: the analysis of primary evidence in answering historical
questions and the capacity to communicate one's findings in well-organized,
solidly-argued written form. Special topics of interest include the material
culture of the Roman world; the use of images in the pursuit of political
agendas; classical notions of the divine and concepts of gender, power and
identity. Popular constructs of ancient Rome, specifically in film, will
provide another area of consideration for comparison throughout the semester.



















**Books required:** Thomas W. Africa, _The Immense Majesty_ , 1991

> Robert Kebric, _Roman People_ , 2000

>

> All assigned readings not in Kebric or Africa are on Electronic Reserve.

**Evaluation:** Participation: 10%

> Papers: 20%

>

> Quizzes/Film Comments: 20%

>

> Midterm: 25%

>

> [Final](prepfinal20502.html): 25%

**Films:** ["Cabiria"](cabiriaqs02.html) (1915)

> ["A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum"](fthwf.html) (1966)

>

> ["Spartacus"](spartcomm.html) (1960)

>

> ["Cleopatra"](cleocomm63.html) (1963)

>

> ["I, Claudius" ](iclaudqs.html)(BBC miniseries: 1976)

>

> ["Life of Brian"](brianqs.html) (1979)

>

> ["Fall of the Roman Empire" ](fallromempqs2.html)(1964)

>

> ["Gladiator"](gladqs.html) (2000)

Week 1 January 9- 11

> [Iron Age Italy](1lec20502.html)

>

> [Etruscan Rome](2lec20502.html)

>

> Reading: Africa pp 3-36

>

> Reserve: MacKendrick, "The Etruscans"

Week 2 January 14-18

> [Early Rome: Text & Artifact](3lec20502.html)

>

> [Legends of Early Rome](4lec20502.html)

>

> [Early Rome: Society & Kings](5lec20502.html)

>

> Reading: Africa pp 37-54, 67-91

>

> Reserve: [Livy, Book 1, 2.1](livylinks.html)

Week 3 January 21-25

> JAN 21: MARTIN LUTHER KING DAY HOLIDAY

>

> [Early Republican Politics](6lec20502.html)/QUIZ ONE

>

> [Roman Expansion](7lec20502.html)

>

> Reading: Africa pp 54-66, 91-99; Kebric pp 1-18

>

> Reserve: L & R I, sections 25-29, 32

Week 4 January 28 - February 1

> [Rome and Italy](8lec20502.html)

>

> [Rome vs. Carthage](9lec20502.html)

>

> [The Punic Wars](10lec20502.html)

>

> Reading: Africa pp 100-128; Kebric pp 18-35

>

> Reserve: L & R I, sections 13, 18, 57-67

>

> Film: ["Cabiria"](cabiriaqs02.html)

Week 5 February 4-8

> [Conquest of the Mediterranean](11lec20502.html)/QUIZ TWO

>

> [Effects of Conquest: Abroad](12lec20502.html)

>

> [Effects of Conquest: At Home](13lec20502.html)

>

> Reading: Africa pp 129-154

>

> Reserve: [Plutarch](plutarchlinks205.html), Cato the Elder

Week 6 February 11-15

> [Roman Society and Comedy](14lec20502.html)

>

> [Second Century Politics](15lec20502.html)

>

> [The Gracchi](16lec20502.html)

>

> Reading: Africa pp 154-161; Kebric pp 36-50, 55-56

>

> Reserve: L & R I, sections 96-98; [Plautus
](plautuslinks205.html)_Pseudolus_

Week 7 February 18-22

> [Marius & Sulla](17lec20502.html)/QUIZ THREE

>

> [Politics in the Age of Cicero](18lec20502.html)

>

> [Rise of the "First Triumvirate"](19lec20502.html)/[ PAPER
DUE](paperone20502.html)

>

> Reading: Africa pp 161-187; Kebric 51-55

>

> Reserve: Sallust, _The Conspiracy of Catiline_

>

> Film: ["A Funny Thing Happened On the Way to the Forum"](fthwf.html)

Week 8 February 25-March 1

> [Caesar's Rise to Power](20lec20502.html)

>

> [Caesar and Civil War ](21lec20502.html)

>

> [Dictator and Propagandist](22lec20502.html)

>

> Reading: Africa pp 187-198; Kebric pp 57-86

>

> Reserve: Caesar, selections from _GallicWar_ & _Civil War_ ;
[Plutarch](plutarchlinks205.html), selections from _Caesar_

>

> Film: ["Spartacus"](spartcomm.html)

Week 9 March 4-8

> [Fall of the Roman Republic](23lec20502.html)

>

> [MIDTERM](midtermprep02.html) March 6

>

> [The Rise of Augustus](24lec20502.html)

>

> Reading: Africa pp 198-207, 218-226; Kebric pp 87-121

>

> Reserve: Suetonius, _Augustus_ ; L & R I, sections 194-196, 204, 206-207

Week 10 March 11-15

> SPRING BREAK

Week 11 March 18-22

> [The Augustan Principate ](25lec20502.html)

>

> [Blueprint of a "Golden Age"](26lec20502.html)

>

> [Augustan Society](27lec20502.html)

>

> Reading: Africa pp 208-217; Kebric, pp 122-125

>

> Reserve: [Vergil](vergillinks205.html), _Aeneid_ books 4, 6; MacKendrick
"Buildings as Propaganda"

>

> Film: "[Cleopatra" ](cleocomm63.html)part 1

Week 12 March 25-29

> [The Julio-Claudians](28lec20502.html)/QUIZ FOUR

>

> [More of the Julio-Claudians](29lec20502.html)

>

> [Nero and Failure of the System ](30lec20502.html)

>

> Reading: Africa pp 226-235; Kebric pp 125-147, 246-249

>

> Reserve: Suetonius, _Nero_ ; Tacitus, selections from _Annals_

>

> Film: ["Cleopatra"](cleocomm63.html) part 2

Week 13 April 1-5

> [Civil War and a New Dynasty](31lec20502.html)

>

> [The Flavian Empire](32lec20502.html)

>

> [Pompeii & Private Life](33lec20502.html)

>

> Reading: Africa pp 235-238, appendix on women; Kebric pp 148-184

>

> Reserve: Suetonius, _Vespasian_ ; L & R II, section 90; Shelton 288-306

>

> Film: ["I, Claudius"](iclaudqs.html)

Week 14 April 8-12

> [Trajan & Hadrian](34lec20502.html)

>

> Pompeii video/QUIZ FIVE

>

> [The Height of Empire](36lec20502.html)

>

> Reading: Africa pp 238-283; Kebric pp 185-208, 276-301

>

> Film: ["Life of Brian" ](brianqs.html)

Week 15 April 15-19

> [Rise of Christianity](37lec20502.html)

>

> [Christianity & the State](38lec20502.html)

>

> [Commodus & the Severans ](39lec20502.html)

>

> Reading: Africa pp 314-346; Kebric pp 209--275

>

> Reserve: L & R II, sections 104-107, 167-171; "Origins of Christianity";
"The Work of Paul"

>

> Film: ["Fall of the Roman Empire"](fallromempqs2.html)

Week 16 April 22-26

> Third Century Chaos part [one](40lec20502.html); part[
two](jerry40lec20502.html)/[PAPER DUE](paper2protocol.html)

>

>> note this is new due date for paper 2

>

> Chaos and Recovery: Diocletian's Reforms part [one](jerry41lec20502.html);
part[ two](41lec20502.html)

>

> [Tetrarchy and Civil War](42lec20502.html)/QUIZ SIX

>

> Reading: Africa pp 284-314, 346-357

>

> Reserve: L & R II, sections 119- 120, 123, 128-130, 172-175

>

> Film: "Gladiator"

Week 17 April 29-May 1

> ["In This Sign": Constantine as Dominus](43lec20502.html)

>

> [Deterioration and "Fall"](44lec20502.html)

>

> Reading: Africa pp 358-401; Kebric pp 302-311

**[Final](prepfinal20502.html):** Friday May 3, 11-1

**Participation:** Students are required to attend class, listen thoughtfully,
and take part in classroom activities, which will include written responses to
the ancient sources. Each student must purchase a pack of 3" x5" lined index
cards to document participation.

**Papers:** Each is a 3 to 4 page (typewritten) essay on a topic to be chosen
from a list circulated in advance. Papers will emphasize the analysis of
primary historical evidence, but also the development of critical
communication skills: organization, argumentation, presentation. Due Feb 22
and April 22, by 5 p.m. in professor's mailbox, Social Sciences 215.

**Quizzes/Film Commentary:** Every other week, quizzes will be given during
the last ten minutes of class. Quizzes will typically be short essay; a map
format may also be offered. THERE WILL BE NO MAKE-UPS OF IN-CLASS QUIZZES. In
addition, students must submit at least one film commentary (more than one, if
so desired). Films will be shown on campus in the late afternoon; most of the
films are also locally available on video or at the main library. Each student
will receive a film viewing guide in advance, which will address particular
aspects to watch for and particular questions to which the student must
respond (about a paragraph for each question). Each film review is due in
class by the end of the next week. The top seven scores on quizzes and film
commentaries will be used in tabulating the final grade.

**Tests:**[ midterm](midtermprep02.html) and [final](prepfinal20502.html) are
each a combination of identification and essay; you will choose four
identification terms and one essay topic among several presented to you. Study
guides will be distributed in advance, consisting of a number of essay topics
from which those appearing on the exam will be selected. Terms for
identification will also be drawn from these essay topics, in order to allow
you to focus your preparation better. A successful essay must present a thesis
and well-organized supporting arguments, making use of primary sources as
documentary evidence; a successful identification must give the meaning of the
term, place it in the appropriate chronological, geographical, and historical
context and explain the significance of the item in Roman history. Final
examination will NOT be cumulative.

**The University of Arizona observes a Code of Academic Integrity, which
demands that all material submitted by a student be the student's own work.
Failure to comply with this Code will result in disciplinary sanctions. A
complete copy of this Code is available from the Dean of Students or the
Committee on Academic Integrity.**

