HIST 104  
  
  
  

Welcome to History 104, Ancient Western Civilization, a course designed to
fulfill the requirements of the History major and the Liberal Arts and
Sciences Program's "Civilization Cluster." In it you will be introduced to the
general outline of the history of Western Civilization from the appearance of
the first literate peoples in Mesopotamia to the shattering of Europe's
religious unity in the Reformation.  
  

**Objectives.**  

The course has three main objectives:

1\. To introduce the student to those aspects of ancient civilization that
continue to influence our lives today.

2\. To give the student a command of those historical events and persons that
are a normal part of every educated person's knowledge and make up what is
called "cultural literacy."

3\. To teach the student to think and write critically about historical
documents.  

*****WARNING: THIS SYLLABUS IS SUBJECT TO REVISION BY THE INSTRUCTOR, PROVIDED
THAT WRITTEN OR VERBAL NOTICE IS GIVEN IN CLASS.*****

**HIST 104: Ancient Western Civilization**  
Fall 1997 M-F 9:30 - 10:20 M115  
  
Frances B. Titchener  
M323I  
797-1298  
frant@wpo.hass.usu.edu  
TTY 435-797-1297  
FAX 435-797-3899

**Office Hours** : 10:30 - 11:15 MWF and by appointment

I will be happy to see you any time during office hours, with no appointment
necessary. Please ask for me at the History Office, M323. It will speed things
up if you also give your name and this class (HIST 104).

Any time other than formal office hours, please have an APPOINTMENT MADE IN
ADVANCE. You can usually do so just before or after class. Please also be
aware that office hours are not a substitute for missed class. If you think
you missed handouts or announcements, please see one of your Teaching
Assistants (Brandon Hartley or Emily Monson) or one of the Undergraduate
Teaching Fellows (Sarah Neilson or Barbara Croft). If you need class notes,
please see one of your fellow students.

With that in mind, **PLEASE DO** come by during office hours when it is
convenient for you.

**Required Text** : _Western Civilization. Vol. I._ 3rd edition Spielvogel
(packaged with reader)

Of course you will be expected to read all assigned material. The main
textbook provides the basic narrative for the course and is there to give you
background that I will not provide in class.

**This information can be made available in braille, large print, and audio
format upon request.**

**Grades: 750 points total**

100 Pts. Midterm  
130 pts. Final  
70 pts. Quizzes  
450 pts. Writing Assignments  
  
93-100: A  
90- 92.9 A-  
87- 89.9 B+  
83- 86.9 B  
80- 82.9 B-  
77- 79.9 C+  
73- 76.9 C  
70- 72.9 C-  
67- 69.9 D+  
63- 66.9 D  
60- 62.9 D- BELOW 60 F

***IT IS UP TO YOU TO KEEP YOUR QUIZZES AND OTHER GRADED WORK IN CASE IT IS
NECESSARY TO VERIFY THE SCORES.***

**Mid-term exam** (Chapters 1-6) Multiple choice, matching, true-false, short-
answer, fill-in-the-blank, map exercise.

**Final exam** (Chapters 7-13) Multiple choice, matching, true-false, short-
answer, fill-in-the-blank, map exercise, essay question (see Writing Groups).

**Quizzes.** There will be nine ten-point quizzes given, each on the last day
of the school week during the first five minutes of class BY THE CLASSROOM
CLOCK. Each quiz will cover an assigned document from your Spielvogel text.
You are only required to take seven, although you may take all nine and count
only the seven best scores.

**Writing Groups.** The nine writing assignments will provide you with
experience and preparation for the essay question on your final exam. Although
there are many important components to good writing, the **specific writing
skills** that these assignments are meant to help you develop this quarter are
1) interpreting a question and 2) constructing an outline. More information
about how the writing groups work follows later (see **Completing the Writing
Exercises** ).

**Attendance**. Attendance is not formally part of your grade **WITH THE
EXCEPTION OF WRITING GROUP DAYS**. However, your chances of performing well in
this class without it are virtually none, not to mention your chances of help,
sympathy, etc. from me. This class, like many history courses, requires a fair
amount of reading and contemplation. Since much of the test material will come
from lectures in class, good note-taking and review techniques are essential
for you to do well. Do not take this class expecting to slide through; it will
take a lot of work. Do not take this class if you are already overloaded on
hours and you are worried about your grade point average and  "must" achieve a
certain grade. Take this class because you want to understand more about the
basis of much of your own civilization.

**Incomplete (I) Grade.** Students are required to complete all courses for
which they are registered by the end of the quarter. In some cases, a student
may be unable to complete all of the course work because of extenuating
circumstances, but **not** due to poor performance or to retain financial aid.
The term  "extenuating" circumstances includes: (1) incapacitating illness
which prevents a student from attending classes for a minimum period of two
weeks, (2) a death in the immediate family, (3) financial responsibilities
requiring a student to alter course schedule to secure employment, (4) change
in work schedule as required by employer, or (5) other emergencies deemed
appropriate by the instructor. The student may petition the instructor for
time beyond the end of the quarter to finish the work. **If the instructor
agrees** , two grades will be given, an I and a letter grade for the course
computed as if the missing work were zero. Documentation of the circumstances
cited to justify an incomplete grade is required. (USU Undergraduate Bulletin,
1996-98, p.16.)

**Make-Up Exams.** I do not provide make-ups. No exceptions, no exemptions, no
excuses. A missed exam counts as a zero.

**Academic Honesty**. Please see the Undergraduate Catalog or the Course
Bulletin for descriptions and examples of Academic Dishonesty. Any instances
in this class will result in an automatic grade of  "F".

**CLASS SCHEDULE**  
1\. 10/01 - 10/03 Spielvogel Chs. 1 and 2  
Quiz 1: Friday, 10/01  
Document: A Dinner of the Persian King (Spielvogel p.59)

2\. 10/06 - 10/10 Spielvogel Ch. 3  
Quiz 2: Friday, 10/08  
Document: The Battle of Marathon (Spielvogel p.83)  
WRITING GROUP 1: Friday

3\. 10/13 - 10/17 Spielvogel Ch. 4  
Quiz 3: Friday, 10/15  
Document: Miraculous Cures (Spielvogel p.124)  
WRITING GROUP 2: Friday

4\. 10/20 - 10/24 Spielvogel Ch. 5  
Quiz 4: Friday, 10/22  
Document: The Twelve Tables (Spielvogel p.140)  
WRITING GROUP 3: Friday

5\. 10/27 - 10/31 Spielvogel Ch. 6  
Quiz 5: Friday, 10/29  
Document: The Achievements of Augustus (Spielvogel p.174)  
WRITING GROUP 4: Friday

6\. 11/03- 11/07 MONDAY, MID-TERM; Spielvogel Ch. 7  
Quiz 6: Friday, 11/05  
Document: Germanic Customary Law (Spielvogel p. 223)  
WRITING GROUP 5: Friday

7\. 11/10 - 11/14 Spielvogel Ch. 8  
Quiz 7: Friday, 11/12  
Document:Achievements of Charlemagne (Spielvogel p.247)  
WRITING GROUP 6: Friday

8\. 11/17 - 11/21 Spielvogel Ch. 9  
Quiz 8: Friday, 11/19  
Document: Elimination of Medieval Forests (Spielvogel p.282)  
WRITING GROUP 7: Friday

9\. 11/24- 11/25 Spielvogel Ch. 10; THANKSGIVING holiday

10\. 12/01 - 12/05 Spielvogel Chs. 11 and 12  
Quiz 9: Friday, 12/03  
Document: University Students ( Spielvogel p.358)  
WRITING GROUP 8: Friday

11\. 12/08-12/12 Spielvogel Ch. 13  
WRITING GROUP 9: Friday

FINAL EXAM: Wednesday, December 17, 7:30 - 9:20

**NO FINAL WILL BE ADMINISTERED EARLY**

****

**Completing the Writing Exercises**

You will be assigned to a six-student writing group at the end of the FIRST
week of class. **All Writing Group work takes place in class.** Your points
are based on attendance and completion of the paragraph, and meeting with the
professor or Teaching Assistant for revision. **IF YOU FAIL TO MEET WITH THE
PROFESSOR OR ONE OF THE TEACHING ASSISTANTS DURING THE FINAL FOUR WEEKS, YOU
WILL FORFEIT ALL WRITING GROUP POINTS.**

**Before you come to class:**

  * **Re-read** the pertinent texts. Use the index in the back to help you find material.  

  * Identify the different elements in the question. Your group will construct an outline of the question **TOGETHER**. 

**On the class day your writing group meets:**

  * Assemble quickly. The faster your group gets started, the better job it can do.  

  * Quickly choose a recorder and a leader. The recorder will be responsible for filling out the cover sheet (attendance and outline). The leader will be responsible for seeing that all tasks are completed on time and for turning in the cover sheet and student paragraphs. These offices should differ for each meeting. Each group member will act at least once as either leader or recorder.  

  * Assign the introduction, conclusion, and four "elemental" paragraphs. Each student will write one paragraph answering one part of the essay question, the introduction, or conclusion (first and second meetings; after the sixth meeting, **all** students will write **all** paragraphs.). There must be as many different paragraphs as there are group members.   

  * Write your paragraph, being sure to indicate whether it is the introduction, conclusion, or a supporting paragraph (in which case number it clearly). Make sure your name is on this paper.  

  * Meet with your "sister" group (see Writing Groups). Each group will listen to the other's essay read aloud. Each member will read his/her own paragraph aloud.  

  * The recorder will turn in the Record Sheet for your group and the completed paragraphs in the correct order (for meetings one and two).

**For Writing Group Meetings 6, 7, and 8:**

  * Each member will write a complete essay using the group outline. Therefore, the recorder will turn in a record sheet and six complete essays.

**During the final four weeks:**

  * Students are required to schedule a private meeting with the professor or one of the Teaching Assistants to discuss and revise one of the last three writing projects. This essay, after further revision, will be turned in along with the final exam and graded as the essay component.

**IF YOU FAIL TO MEET WITH THE PROFESSOR OR ONE OF THE TEACHING ASSISTANTS
DURING THE FINAL FOUR WEEKS, YOU WILL FORFEIT ALL WRITING GROUP POINTS.**

**Sample Record Sheet for Group ______**  

Group member name: __________________________________________

Task Leader; Introduction  
  

Group member name __________________________________________

Task First paragraph  

Group member name __________________________________________

Task Second paragraph  

Group member name __________________________________________

Task Third paragraph  

Group member name __________________________________________

Task Fourth paragraph  

Group member name __________________________________________

Task Recorder; Conclusion  

FOR ABSENTEES, RECORD "ABSENT" NEXT TO "TASK".

**Writing Group Assignments**  

First Writing Group Meeting  

1\. Why is Hammurabi's Code such an important document for historians? (Groups
1-6)  

2\. How did Assyrian culture compare to other early fertile crescent cultures,
like Hittite, Sumerian, or Babylonian? (Groups 7-12)  

3\. What was the significance of Cyrus' role in the rise of the Persian
empire? (Groups 13-18)  

Second Writing Group Meeting

4\. Compare the first poem by Sappho to the passage on excellence from the
_Iliad._ What does the comparison reveal about differences in Greek society?
(Groups 1-6)

5\. In Pericles' eyes, what are the ideals of Athenian democracy? (Groups
7-12)

6\. Was Socrates a sophist? Why or why not? (Groups 13-18)  

Third Writing Group Meeting

7\. How did Hellenistic urban centers differ from the Greek city-states of the
classical era? (Groups 1-6)

8\. How did Aristotle's philosophy differ from that of Plato? (Groups 7-12)

9\. Was Alexander more typical of an eastern or western ruler? (Groups 13-18)

Fourth Writing Group Meeting

10\. What values did Livy emphasize in his account of Cincinnatus? How
important were those values to Rome's success? (Groups 1-6)

11\. How did the creation of the Twelve Tables resemble other plebeian
victories over the patricians? (Groups 7-12)

12\. What does the description of Rome's destruction of Carthage reveal about
the nature of Roman imperialism? (Groups 13-18)  

Fifth Writing Group Meeting

13\. Why were the **latifundia** such a departure from the traditional Roman
agrarian way of life? (Groups 1-6)

14\. To what extent is it fair to describe first century Roman politics as
"mob rule"? (Groups 7-12)

15\. Why was Julius Caesar assassinated? Did the assassins achieve their
goals? (Groups 13-18)  

Sixth Writing Group Meeting

16\. Why were the Huns so repulsive to the Romans? (Groups 1-6)

17\. Evaluate the statement "...the Arabs were victims of their own success".
(Groups 7-12)

18\. What was the purpose of the "ordeal of hot water"? What does it reveal
about the nature of the society that used it? (Groups 13-18)  

Seventh Writing Group Meeting

19\. Describe the essential tenets of feudalism. (Groups 1-6)

20\. What was the essential "bone of contention" between the king and the pope
during the investitutre controversy, and what were the most powerful weapons
each had available in this dispute? (Groups 7-12)

21\. Describe the eleventh-century scholars who used logic as a critical tool
to examine religious faith. (Groups 13-18)

Eighth Writing Group Meeting

22\. How was Innocent III able to control the imperial succession and triumph
over "Germany"? (Groups 1-6)

23\. What were the major problems Magna Carta was meant to solve? (Groups
7-12)

24\. In which crusade did St. Louis participate? Describe that crusade,
placing it in context with others before and after. (Groups 13-18)  

Ninth Writing Group MeetinG

25\. Where did the battle of Crecy fit in the course of a summary of the
Hundred Years' War? (Groups 1-6)  
  
26\. Describe the different theories on the Blck Death's origin and the varied
responses to it. (Groups 7-12)

27\. Describe the peasant revolts of the fourteenth century and their various
results. (Groups 13-18)  
  
  

GROUP PAIRS FOR READING  

1-18  
2-10  
3-12  
4-17  
5-11  
6-16  
7-15  
8-14  
9-13

**How to Analyze a Document** (adapted from the essay by Norm Jones)

This information is designed to help you in constructing your outline with
your writing group. Some questions will not apply to your exercise, while some
questions you need to ask may not be included. This is a guide only!

The craft of the historian turns around the analysis of the written remnants
of the past. One of the objectives of this course will be to teach you to
critique documents in order to draw as much information as possible from them.
In order to do this properly we must ask a series of questions about each
document, about each grouping of documents, and, ultimately, about all the
available remnants of an historical period. This all starts with the
individual document.

1\. **When was it written**? If we can date it even approximately you will
know important things about context and meaning. For instance, in the
Christmas story it says  "Caesar Augustus ordered all the world to be taxed."
Although the gospels are not dated, we can infer a date for the story because
we know when Caesar Augustus (Octavian) reigned. Add Herod and Pontius Pilate
and we can come close to establishing when the events recorded took place. Of
course there may be a difference between when the story occurred and when it
was recorded. Both dates are very important. Again, if we know the Gospel of
Luke was written at least sixty years after Christ's birth we can infer
certain things about it (i.e. the author was not an eye witness).

2\. **Where was it written**? Knowing where the author lived can help us
understand the language, the form, and the content of a document. For
instance, when Xenophon wrote about the constitution of King Lycurgus of the
Spartans he did it in Athens. Had a Spartan written about his society it might
have been a very different story. Of course if an author lived outside the
society, we must ask how he or she got the information. If the author lived in
the society, we must ask about gender, social status, opportunity for learning
about the things recorded, and the biases native observers bring to their own
cultures.

3\. **Who wrote it**? Simply knowing the author's name does us little good,
but if we know something about the person from other sources we may learn more
about the document. For instance, if we know that Machiavelli was a
professional diplomat who had observed the French, Spanish, and Papal courts
at first hand and participated at a high level in the Florentine government we
understand _The Prince_ much better. If we did not know that he was an active
participant in politics we might dismiss the book as merely a piece of
political theory, rather than seeing it as distilled lessons from renaissance
life.

4\. **Why was it written**? No author writes without purpose, and we need to
know what the author hoped to accomplish by writing. The value of the document
as evidence is directly related to its purpose. Tacitus, for instance, wrote a
book called _Germania_. It tells us most of what we know about the German
tribes beyond the borders of the Roman Empire. However, realizing that he
wrote it to celebrate the virtues of these  "noble savages" in order to shame
the Romans into reform means that we cannot always believe what he said about
the Germans. If the work is moral propaganda, Tacitus would not be likely to
celebrate the darker sides of German society.

5\. **What genre is used**? Is this document a letter? a philosophical
dialogue? a meditation? an advertisement? a political speech? The many
different forms of discourse each have structures peculiar to themselves. What
is said and how it is said, and how it is understood, depends on the form
chosen. We would not, for instance, treat the Thucydidean  "Funeral Oration"
in the same way we would a personal letter to a friend. The one is an effort
to achieve a political end, the other a personal communication. Of course
there are things that would go unsaid in both. In politics and friendship, as
in all other parts of life, the context and genre are understood by the
receiver of the communication. The historian must recognize this.

6\. **For whom was it written**? If we can determine for whom it was written,
we will be able to see why the genre was chosen. The more we know about the
audience the better we understand the document. For instance, knowing that
Thucydides' Pericles made the  "Funeral Oration" before a group of war widows,
orphans, and other citizens in Athens helps us understand why he stressed the
valor and glory of the dead soldiers.

7\. **Where did the text we have come from**? Is it written by the original
author or a copy made at another time and place? This is an especially
important question in intellectual history and biblical studies. Obviously a
play in Shakespeare's own handwriting would be considered closer to what
Shakespeare intended to write than a printed version made from an unknown
text. The further the text we have is from the original, the greater the
danger of error and the less value it has to the historian. If it is the only
copy extant we must use it, but always with the awareness that it may be
corrupted.

8\. **What language is it in**? To use evidence properly the scholar must be
aware of the document's original language. Ideally he or she will only use the
document in the original language, knowing that all translations contain
errors and distortions induced by the impossibility of translating directly
from one language to another. For instance, anyone wishing to study the New
Testament must know _koine_ Greek, the language in which it was written, as
well as Hebrew, since some of the gospels, like Mark, were written by Hebrew
speakers using Greek as their second language, as well as Aramaic, the
language Jesus spoke. Then, and only then, can the scholar get a clear picture
of what Jesus said. Using the New Testament in English means that the reader
is four languages away from Christ's words. Of course the student does not
know those languages and must use translations. Nevertheless, always ask about
the original and be aware of the problems inherent in translation.

