### History 712  
Colloquium on Early Modern Europe: the 17th and 18th Centuries



In this colloquium we will consider three major historiographical questions:

  1. the "Crisis Thesis" in the 17th century 
  2. the emergence of the early-modern state (absolutism, mercantilism) 
  3. the changing concepts of the Enlightenment. 



**Assignments**

The first third of the course, (ca. 21 June to mid-July), will focus on
interpretations of "The General Crisis Thesis of the early to mid 17th
century." This problem concerns more than a crisis or series of crises: the
thesis is in fact an attempt to define the contours of the 17th century, to
revisit the concepts of the Counter and/or Catholic Reformation; the baroque
(and the Age of the Baroque) as a style and a world view; also the emergence
of the early-modern state and its attendant bureaucracies and armies; and the
economic vagaries of the century.

At the second meeting of the class, please read all of Theodore Rabb's _The
Struggle for Stability in Early Modern Europe_ (Oxford University Press); also
H. G. Koenigsberger, "The Crisis of the 17th Century. A Farewell?" in his
_Politicians and Virtuosi_ (on reserve in the Reserve Room of the Main
Library.)

Also in the first two weeks begin drawing up a list of books and articles in
an area or areas of your choice. This bibliography will serve as a basis for a
final paper in the course, the topic to be selected in consultation with the
instructor. A preliminary "draft" of the paper is due **18 August** , along
with a bibliography.

Here are some suggested fields of interest for the final paper:

  1. Political-Institutional; Diplomatic-International 
  2. Economic-Commercial-Agrarian-Colonial Ventures 
  3. Cultural: aesthetic: Fine arts; Architecture; City/Palace Planning 
  4. Cultural: Mentalities: Intellectual history; History of ideas, including scientific ideas, political theory, religious ideas 
  5. Popular discontent: Revolt, Revolution, Urban riots, agrarian uprising, etc. 
  6. War: military planning: bureaucracy; strategy and tactics; fortress Europe; the so-called Military Revolution. 

As bibliographical guides you may find useful (among many others): John Roach,
_A Bibliography of Modern History_ (Cambridge University Press, 1968); the
volumes of the New Cambridge Modern History, vols. I through XII; also volume
XIII (1979) a Companion Volume to the New Cambridge; The "Rise of Modern
Europe" series edited by William Langer; The _International Bibliography of
Historical Sciences_ , published since 1926; In France, the _Repertoire
bibliographique de l'histoire de la France_ ; _French Historical Studies_
contains extensive bibliographical listings; the _Oxford History of England_ ,
also has extensive bibliographies. I suggest that you scan the reviews of
books in the standard journals; especially useful is the _English Historical
Review_ (which deals with History generally, not just the history of the
English Isles); the _Journal of Modern History_ (which includes all of Europe
and Russia); and the various specialized journals, such as the _Economic
History Review_ ; _Isis_ ; the _Journal of the History of Ideas_ , etc. Also a
good source of bibliographic information are recent textbooks, for example
those by Charles Wilson, Geoffrey Parker, Richard Dunn, Ragnhild Hatton,
Matthew Anderson; Norman Hampson, Carlo Cipolla, and Paul Sonnino _et. al_.

At the third meeting of the course (5 July), please write a brief (2 to 3
pages) review of the "Crisis Thesis" and/or related topics, to be read to the
class and then turned in to the instructor. In preparation for this exercise
read in addition Geoffrey Parker and Smith's "Introduction" to the _General
Crisis of 17th Century_ ; and J. H. Hexter's "Fernand Braudel and the Monde
Braudellien . . .", both in the Reserve Room, Main Library. In writing this
essay you may wish to take as a point of departure your special field of
interest, e.g., political history, diplomacy, economic and social unrest, etc.
Your may wish to submit at this time a preliminary bibliography.

In the second third of the quarter (12 July to 2 August), we will consider a
problem arising from the "Crisis," that is the centralization of the State;
this era is often termed "The Age of Louis XIV," named for one of the chief
practioners of so-called absolutism (and its economic counterpart,
mercantilism). We will also explore the cultural and social aspects of the
era.

For the fourth week (12-14 July), please have read from Louis XIV's _Memoirs
for the Instruction of the Dauphin_ (several translations in the Reserve
Room); you may also read in the Sonnino translation. The general topic for the
fourth and fifth week will be a problem arising from the "Crisis:" the
question of Absolutism and Mercantilism.

Also read for the fourth and fifth weeks: from Ragnhild Hatton, _Louis XIV and
Absolutism_ , pp. 3-84. and from R. Hatton, _Louis XIV and Europe_ , pp.
16-59.

To sum up the Age of Louis XIV, prepare a brief paper on some aspect of the
period, including the cultural aspects. The paper should not be more than 2-3
typed pages. It will be due 19 July.

The last third of the quarter will be devoted to a consideration of the
European Enlightenment, that is ca. 1680 to the years leading to the French
Revolution, 4 - 25 August. Readings: Norman Hampson. Additionally assignments
will be made in Peter Gay's two-volume work on the Enlightenment; also
selections from authors of the period.



**SUMMARY**

Assigned books:

  * Theodore Rabb, _The Struggle for Stability in Early Modern Europe_ (Oxford) (available at SBX) 
  * Paul Sonnino _et al._ , , _The Reign of Louis XIV_ (Humanities Press) 
  * Norman Hampson, _The Enlightenment_ (Penguin) 
Papers due:

  * 28 June -- Brief paper (2-3 typed pages) on the "Crisis thesis" 
  * 19 July -- Brief paper (2-3 typed pages) on the Age of Louis XIV 
  * 23 August -- Draft of the final paper (no more than 15 typed pages) 

