 ![](image4.jpg)  
---  
  
 ![](class.gif)  
  
 ![](syllabus.gif)  
  
| [General Info](index.htm)| [Course Description](content.htm) |
[Syllabus](syllabus.htm) | [Contact Info](contact.htm) |

* * *

**LECTURE SCHEDULE** _(subject to minor tinkering and revisions)_

_  
_The European Situation circa 1700__

Mar 29   Introduction: the eighteenth-century as object of study and disdain

Mar 31   The Academies: issues of aesthetics and power

Apr    5   Rome: academic stronghold

Apr   7   Venice: a tradition of color and sensuality

Apr   12   Naples/London/Madrid: international context and "wannabees"

Apr   14   Versailles: absolute political power and the arts

Apr   19   Paris: art of the emerging "public sphere"

__The Decline of Absolutism and the Visual Arts, 1715-1750__

Apr  21   The Grand Manner: final glories of large-scale decorations

Apr  26    **Mid-term Examination**

Apr   28   The crisis of History Painting

May    3   Portraiture: imaging a new public

May    5   Watteau: enigma of the _f ete galante_

May   10   Erotic pleasures and other sensual delights

May   12   Genre Painting: the interest of everyday life

May   17   Chardin: the virtues of silence

__The Visual Arts and the__ _philosophes _, 1750-1780__

May _  _19   Antiquity rediscovered: Herculaneum, Pompeii, and the art-world
of Rome ca 1750

May    24    _Le go ut grec_: last refuge of the Ancien Regime

May    26    _Sensibilit e_: feeling conquers doctrine **! Papers Due
Today!!**

May    31    _La peinture morale_ : a social utility for the arts  

* * *

June      5   ** _Final Examination:_** _Monday 5 June 2000, 8:30 am to 11:30
am, Art 4_

* * *

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS**

  
_Examinations:_ There will be a mid-term and a final examination, each
consisting of a few slide identifications, short essays written about slide
comparisons, and at least one longer essay question. The longer essays will
distributed in advance, with the idea that you will prepare them ahead of the
exam and write them as an "open notebook" response.

  
_Paper:_ A term paper of about 8 typed, double-spaced pages using a font no
larger than 12 points and margins no wider than 1 inch. The topic should be
related to the course material in some way, but the actual focus of each paper
is to be  "invented" by each member of the class. It is strongly suggested
that papers be shaped around at least one work of art on view in a local
museum. We are blessed this term by last spring's reopening of the Legion of
Honor in San Francisco, which has quite a good collection of works that date
from the period of this course. Members of the class are strongly encouraged
to visit the Legion of Honor early in the term and begin thinking about
possible term paper topics. It is also suggested that you discuss possible
paper topics with the instructor before you begin writing, so that you might
profit from his willingness to help you focus your topic. Paper topics that
cross material from this course with other classes (literature, history,
history of science, etc) are both welcomed and encouraged.

  
**_PAPER DUE DATE: FRIDAY 26 MAY 2000  
_** Please note that no late papers will be accepted  
without permission arranged well in advance

* * *

**STUDY AND REVIEW MATERIALS**

  
_Course Reader:_ Due to the lack of a single good book on the eighteenth
century, and not wanting to require the purchase of several expensive volumes,
I have assembled a two-volume Course Reader (available at the Stanford
Bookstore) that will serve as the required text. While not cheap, the reader
manages to deliver a maximum range of texts at a minimum cost. The first pages
of the Course Reader outline the correspondence between its contents and the
lectures. Members of the class are encouraged to read more or less regularly,
both to understand more fully what is said in lecture and because examination
questions will assume that the readings have been completed according to
schedule. A copy of the Course Reader, along with many of the source books
used to make it, are on reserve in the Art Library, as are some related
volumes that might be of use when preparing the term paper.

  
_On-Line Study System:_ All of the visual material presented in the lectures
can be consulted and reviewed on the Art Department's image server through the
Stanford campus network (SUNet). The review images are arranged by lecture
more or less in the order shown in class. Point your browser to the following
address:
**[www.stanford.edu/dept/art/arthist120a/](http://www.stanford.edu/dept/art/arthist120a)**.
To access the site you will need a _logon name_ and a _password_ , both of
which will be announced in lecture.

  
_Review and/or Discussion Sections:_ If there is sufficient interest amongst
undergraduate members of the class to schedule review sessions before the mid-
term and final examinations, they can be arranged. Please voice your opinion
to the instructor as soon as possible.

  
_Graduate Students:_ We will meet weekly to discuss some of the Course Reader
texts, but also a few supplementary works that touch upon more specialized
aspects of eighteenth-century studies. A separate sheet will be provided to
guide your readings and discussion preparation. We should meet very soon to
determine an appropriate place and time for our discussions  
  
  

* * *

| [Stanford University](http://www.stanford.edu/) | [Art and Art History
Department](http://www.stanford.edu/dept/art/) |

[![Bobby Approved - accessible for people with
disabilities](approvedsm.gif)](http://www.cast.org/bobby/)

