### History 519.02  
East Central Europe Since 1919



This course is an advanced survey of East European history from World War I to
the post-Communist era. It will explore the effects of the two World Wars; the
challenges posed by nationality conflict in the interwar period; the rise of
right-wing and communist movements; the political culture of the communist
regimes and the growth of civil societies and dissident movements; and the
revolutionary events of 1989 and their aftermath, including the Yugoslav War.
The course will focus on Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Yugoslavia, Romania,
Bulgaria, and their successor states. In addition to reading historical texts,
students will become acquainted with aspects of East European culture through
fiction and film.



**Objectives:** Students will develop a historical perspective on the major
political and social upheavals and the major ideological trends in twentieth
century Eastern Europe. They will sharpen their analytical skills through a
close reading of primary and secondary texts, and develop their ability to
express their ideas in discussions and written exercises. They will also
consider approaches to the study of the cultural artifacts of modern
societies.



**Books required for all students:**

  1. R. J. Crampton, _Eastern Europe in the Twentieth Century_
  2. Gale Stokes, ed. _From Stalinism to Pluralism: A Documentary History of Eastern Europe Since 1945_
  3. Tadeusz Borowski, _This Way For the Gas, Ladies and Gentlemen_
  4. Slavenka Drakulic, _How We Survived Communism and Even Laughed_ 

In addition, choose either:

  1. David Rieff, _Slaughterhouse: Bosnia and the Failure of the West_
  2. Tom Gjelten, _Sarajevo Daily: A City and its Newspaper Under Siege_ 



**Other required reading (reserve):**

  1. Irina Livezeanu, _Cultural Politics in Greater Romania_
  2. Andrew C. Janos, T _he Politics of Backwardness in Hungary_
  3. Jan T. Gross, _Revolution From Abroad_
  4. Vladimir Macura, "The American Bug." 
  5. Gail Kligman, "The Politics of Reproduction in Ceausescu's Romania. 



**Requirements:**

Midterm and final exams, class attendance and participation. Each student will
be responsible for preparing a question once per week for discussion in small
groups. Map quiz and other short quizzes, and a 6-8 page paper based on course
readings.

Assigned reading should be completed by the first meeting of each week, unless
the instructor indicates another timetable. In order to perform well on the
exams, students must be familiar with the material presented in readings,
lectures and film clips.

If films are shown outside of class time, attendance will be encouraged but
not required.

**Grading:**

    
    
          Midterm - 25% of course grade
          Final - 30%       Paper - 25%
          Class participation - 20%
    
          Map quizzes extra credit -- to be applied to the Midterm
    
    

More than two unexcused absences will result in a lower class participation
grade.

**Format:** Each class session will consist of lecture and discussion,
including small group discussion. Several film clips will be shown in the
course of the quarter.

**Papers:** The paper topic for undergraduates will be distributed in class,
and papers written on another topic cannot be accepted.

Papers must be handed in to the instructor at the beginning of class on
November 26. Extensions will be given only in case of an emergency, such as a
serious illness. Computer or printer malfunctions are not acceptable excuses
for lateness. For each day a paper is handed in after the due date, 1/3 of a
grade will be deducted (de, an A will become an A-; a B- will become a C+).
Papers should be neatly typed or printed on a high-quality printer; they
should be well-organized and written in clear and correct English. Footnotes
should be provided.

**Examinations:** The midterm and final examinations must be taken at the
scheduled time. Students will be allowed to take a make-up exam without
penalty only for urgent reasons; in those cases, students will be expected to
present proof of the emergency, such as an excuse from the University Medical
Center. Without a valid excuse, students will be permitted to take a make-up
exam, however, their grade will be reduced by a full letter.

**Academic dishonesty:** Papers and exams must represent the work of the
student alone. In papers, sources must be cited in accordance with standard,
scholarly practice. Plagiarism or cheating will result in a failing grade on
the assignment and other penalties determined by university regulations.
Students are encouraged to consult the instructor if they are uncertain about
the proper use of sources.



**

Topics and Assignments:

**

**Week 1** Introduction

Sept. 26 reading: Crampton, 1-38. Study maps (30, 210).

**Week 2** New states and old frontiers

Oct. 1, 3 Crampton: 39-94, 107-143; Livezeanu (reserve).

**Week 3** Economic crisis and the rise of the Right

Tuesday, Oct. 8 - MAP QUIZ

Oct. 8, 10 reading: Crampton, 152-176; Janos (reserve)

**Week 4** World War II: Occupation and collaboration

Oct. 15, 17 Reading: Crampton, 179-209; Gross (reserve)

**Week 5** World War II: The camps

Oct. 22 reading: Borowski

Thursday, Oct. 24 - MIDTERM EXAM

**Week 6** The post-war interlude and communist seizures of power

Oct. 29, 31 reading: Crampton, 211-239; Stokes, 3-65

**Week 7** Stalinism

Nov. 5, 7 reading: Crampton, 240-303; Stokes, 66-106; Macura (reserve)

**Week 8** Dissent and Repression

Nov. 12, 14 reading: Crampton, 307-376; Stokes, tba

**Week 9** Living with communism; Women under communism

Nov. 19, 21 reading: Kligman (reserve); Drakulic

**Week 10** The collapse

Tuesday, Nov. 26 - PAPERS DUE

Nov. 26 reading: Crampton, 379-415; Stokes, 224-272

Nov. 28-29 Thanksgiving holiday

**Week 11** The Yugoslav Tragedy

Dec. 3, 5 reading: Rieff or Gjelten

**

Final Examination

**

