### University of Michigan

### [History 111](index.html) \- MODERN EUROPE

### Winter Term 2000



### SYLLABUS



Course Description

Requirements

Paper Assignments

Required Readings

Additional Readings

Required Films

>  

"It's sometimes argued that there's no real progress; that a civilization that
kills multitudes in mass warfare, that pollutes the land and oceans with ever
larger quantities of debris, that destroys the dignity of individuals by
subjecting them to a forced mechanized existence can hardly be called an
advance over the simpler hunting and gathering existence of prehistoric times.
But this argument, though romantically appealing, doesn't hold up. The
primitive tribes permitted far less individual freedom than does modern
society. Ancient wars were committed with far less moral justification than
modern ones. A technology that produces debris can find, and is finding, ways
of disposing of it without ecological upset. And the school-book pictures of
primitive man sometimes omit some of the detractions of his primitive life--
the pain, the disease, famine, the hard labor needed just to stay alive. From
the agony of bare existence to modern life can be soberly described only as
upward progress, and the sole agent for this progress is quite clearly reason
itself."

> \--Robert M. Pirsig, Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance (1974)



### Course Description

We will not provide a total view of the movement "from the agony of bare
existence to modern life," as Pirsig puts it; this course will, however,
examine the emergence, and the crisis, of modern politics, society and culture
in Europe. It will be left to you to decide whether or not this has been
progress.

This course is an introduction to the history of Europe in this grand and
cataclysmic age, from the Enlightenment to the total wars of the twentieth
century and after (1715 to the present). We will survey some defining episodes
of European history--the French revolution, the Napoleonic wars, the
revolutions of 1848, the scramble for empire, the world wars of the twentieth
century, the Holocaust, the democratic revolutions of 1989. We will examine
developments in society, culture and ideas--industrialization and
urbanization, changing gender roles, the emergence of new aesthetic forms
(from the novel to the film), scientific explanations of racial difference,
mass culture and the birth of a consumer society. We will look to Europe's
relationship with the wider world, from the grand colonial projects of the
nineteenth century, to decolonization and immigration in the twentieth.
Throughout, we will ask: How were these developments experienced? How were
they remembered and retold? What is their legacy? Course readings/viewings
include a lively selection of original sources--recollections of revolution,
classic political statements, soldiers' accounts of the experience of war, a
worker's autobiography, novels, propaganda posters, newsreels, historical
films. There are no prerequisites, but for a desire to escape "the most
degrading of intellectual slaveries--that of the exclusive present."

There is simply too much history here; if we aimed to cover the principal
political events of the major powers of Europe, we would be reduced to drawing
schematic outlines. We will study the major political developments of the
period, from a broad perspective. But we will emphasize a set of issues at the
heart of modern European history, examining these in different times and
places: wars and revolutions, relations between Europe and a wider world, the
search for solutions to the problems of modern development, cultural and
intellectual reactions to change, and the continuing disenchantment with
political panaceas.

### Requirements of the Course

  * Attendance at all lectures and discussion sections. 
  * Attentive reading of all assignments. 
  * Active participation in discussion section. (roughly 15% of final grade) 
  * Occasional quizzes in discussion section. (5%) 
  * Three short papers. (35% altogether) 
  * A midterm exam. (20%) 
  * A final exam. (25%) 

### Paper Assignments

There are three short writing assignments for the course. Details about each
assignment will follow.

  * Paper # 1 (3 pages), Due Monday, January 31  The Enlightenment. An Exercise in Historical Imagination 
  * Paper # 2 (3 pages), Due Monday, March 13  Women and Revolution in the 19th c.  Suzanne Voilquin, excerpts from her memoirs, or  
Vera Figner, excerpts from her memoirs

  * Paper # 3 (3 pages), Due Friday, April 7  Mikhail Bulgakov, _Heart of a Dog_ , or  
George Orwell, _Homage to Catalonia_ , or  
"The Marriage of Maria Braun"  

Before writing your papers, look to the handout, "Paper Style Sheet,
Plagiarism, Grading Guidelines." For guidelines to analytic papers, see the
handout, "Writing Analytic Papers for History 111."

Late papers will be penalized.

### Required Readings

There is a required coursepack, available at Ulrich's Bookstore as of this
Friday. Tel: 741-9669. The following required books are (or will soon be)
available at Shaman Drum Bookstore on South State St. Tel: 662-7407. You may
order them from their website (<http://www.shamandrum.com>). These readings
will be available in the Reserve Room of the Undergraduate Library.

  * Mortimer Chambers, et al, _The Western Experience_ (McGraw-Hill, Seventh ed., 1999), vol. C, The Modern Era. 
  * Mary Wollstonecraft, _A Vindication of the Rights of Woman_ (1792) 
  * Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, _The Communist Manifesto_ (1848) 
  * Mikhail Bulgakov, _Heart of a Dog_ (written 1925) 
  * George Orwell, _Homage to Catalonia_ (1938) 

### __**Additional Readings**

You have two readings that are not listed on the schedule. These are included
for the second paper assignment.

  * Suzanne Voilquin, "Recollections of a Daughter of the People," in Mark Traugott, ed., _The French Worker, Autobiographies from the Early Industrial Era_ (University of California, 1993), pp. 92-115. 
  * Vera Figner, excerpts from her autobiography, in Barbara Engel and Clifford Rosenthal, eds., _Five Sisters: Women Against the Tsar_ (Knopf, 1975), pp. 3-20, 24-40. 

### Required Films

There are three required films for the course. These will be shown in Angell
Hall, Aud. C, at 8:00 pm on the following dates. If you miss the regular
showing of the film, you can arrange to see it at the Film and Video Library
on the second floor of the Undergraduate Library.

  * Monday, January 10 "Ridicule" (1996, France. Dir: Patrice Leconte, 102 min., subtitled) 
  * Monday, January 31 "Burn" (1969, Italy/France. Dir: Gillo Pontecorvo, 112 min.) 
  * Monday, April 3 "The Marriage of Maria Braun" (1979, West Germany. Dir: Rainer Werner Fassbinder, 120 min., subtitled) 



