### History 519.01  
The Habsburg Monarchy and the Polish Lands, 1740-1918



This course is an advanced survey of East Central Europe, focusing on the
peoples of the Habsburg Monarchy and the Polish lands, in particular on Poles,
Hungarians, Czechs, Jews and Austro-Germans. It will trace political, social
and cultural developments from the reign of Maria-Theresa until World War I.
Emphasis will be placed on the comparative study of the nationalities and
diverse regions of East Central Europe, including agrarian and industrial
societies and the modern cities of Vienna, Prague and Budapest. In this
context, the course will examine national ideologies and the emergence of
integral nationalism and ethnic conflict.



**Texts:**

  1. Piotr Wandycz, _The Price of Freedom: A History of East Central Europe From the Middle Ages to the Present_
  2. William O. McCagg, _A History of the Habsburg Jews_
  3. Norman Davies, _God's Playground: A History of Poland_ , Vol. 2 
  4. Charles Ingrao, _The Habsburg Monarchy 1618-1815_
  5. Jaroslav Hasek, _The Good Soldier Svejk_
  6. Required course packet, containing: 
    * Andrew Janos, _The Politics of Backwardness in Hungary_ , pp. 3-148 
    * Peter Brock and H. Gordon Skilling. _The Czech Renascence of the Nineteenth Century_. Chapters 6, 11, 12, 17 
    * Carl E. Schorske, _Fin-de-Siecle Vienna: Politics and Culture_. Chapter 3 ("Politics in a New Key"), pp. 116-180 
    * Katherine David, ''Czech Feminists and Nationalism in the Late Habsburg Monarchy: 'The First in Austria,'" in _The Journal of Women's History_
    * Endre Ady, The Explosive Country. A Selection of Articles and Studies 1898-1916. ("Nationalists"; "In the Margin of an Unknown Corvina Codex"; "A Year Without Laws"; "Earthquake"; ''The Author on His Book''; "Two Incidents in the Life of a Cobbler"; "The Domain of Magnates and Bishops"; "Spiritual Elephantiasis"; "The Explosive Country") 
  7. On Reserve: Selections from Zdenek V. David, ea., _Documents of Czech History 1867-1914_. (manuscript); other short readings. 



**Requirements:**

Midterm and final exams, class attendance and participation. Short oral report
based on class reading to initiate class discussion. Map quiz. For
undergraduates, a 6-8 page paper based on course readings. For graduate
students, a 10-15 page research paper.

Assigned reading should be completed by the first meeting of each week. In
order to perform well on the exams, students must be familiar with the
material presented in both readings and lectures.



**Grading:**

    
    
         Midterm                                30% of course grade
         Final                                  30%
         Paper                                  30%
         Class participation and oral report    10%
         Map quizzes                            extra credit on Midterm
    

Frequent, unexcused absences from class will lower the grade for class
participation.

**Papers:** Papers must be handed in to me at the beginning of class on
November 20. Extensions will be given only in case of an emergency, such as a
serious illness. Computer or printer malfunctions are not acceptable excuses
for lateness. For each day a paper is handed in after the due date, 1/3 of a
grade will be deducted (ie, an A will become an A-; a B- will become a C+).
Papers should be neat, well organized, and written in clear and correct
English. Footnotes should be provided.



**Syllabus**

**Week 1** \- September 20

Introduction: The idea of East Central Europe.

reading: Wandycz, Introduction; Ingrao, 1-104

**

Week 2** \- September 25, 27

Historical Background: Lands and Peoples

reading: Davies, 3-80; McCagg, 1-26; Janos (coursepack), 3-34

**

Week 3** \- October 2, 4

Enlightened Absolutism

reading: Ingrao, 150-219, Wandycz, 105-134; McCagg, 27-43; maps

**

Week 4** \- October 9, 11

The Era of Revolution, Partitioned Poland

*Map Quiz

reading: Ingrao, 220-242; Davies, 81-162, 294-305; McCagg, 47-64

**

Week 5** \- October 16, 18

Modernization and "the Politics of Backwardness" in East Central Europe

reading: Janos (coursepack), 35-83; McCagg, 65-82, 105-122; Wandycz, 156-180;
Davies, 163-206

**

Week 6** \- October 23, 25

October 23 - MIDTERM EXAM

October 25 - National Awakenings

reading: Brock and Skilling (coursepack), Chapter 6; Wandycz, 135-156; short
readings on reserve, tba

**

Week 7** \- October 30, November 1 The Springtime of Nations, 1848

reading: Brock and Skilling, Chapters 11 and 12; Wandycz, 156-165; McCagg,
83-101; Davies, 306-346

**

Week 8** \- November 6, 8

Compromise and Frustration: Hungarians and Czechs in the Constitutional Era

reading: Wandyaz, 180-200; Janos (coursepack), 84-148, Documents, tba; McCagg,
123-139

**

Week 9** \- November 13, 15

The Rise of Integral Nationalism

reading: Schorske (coursepack); Brock and Skilling (coursepack), Chapter 17;
McCagg, 161-200; Davies, 347-368

**

Week 10** \- November 20, 22

November 20: PAPERS DUE

Fin-de-siecle: Modernists, Feminists, Socialists

reading: Ady (coursepack); Davies, 369-377; David (coursepack); McCagg,
201-226; Documents, tba; begin Hasek

**

Thanksgiving Break

** **

Week 11** \- November 27, 29

War and Collapse

reading: Hasek

**

Final Examination

**

