### History 519.03  
The Balkans From the Ottoman Conquest Until World War I



South-east European history from the Battle of Kosovo to the assassination of
the Austrian Archduke Ferdinand. Focuses on the Balkan peoples, particularly
Bulgarians, Croats, Greeks, and Serbs, as well as Balkan Muslims. The focus of
the first half of the course will be the consequences of Ottoman domination of
the peninsula; the second part will emphasize national liberation movements
and nationalist ideologies. The study of political events will be balanced
with social, religious and cultural considerations. Students will read several
primary texts, including the accounts of travelers to the Balkans, and will
become acquainted with aspects of Balkan culture through literature and film.



**Objectives:** Students will develop a historical perspective on southeastern
Europe during the period of Ottoman domination and on the national liberation
movements of the Balkan peoples. In doing so, they will deepen their
understanding of contemporary issues in the Balkans. Students will sharpen
their analytical skills through a close reading of primary documents and
secondary texts and will learn to contextualize travelers' tales. They will
also develop their ability to express themselves in discussions and written
exercises.



**Books required for all students:**

  1. Peter Sugar, _Southeastern Europe Under Ottoman Rule, 1354-1804_
  2. Barbara Jelavich, _History of the Balkans_ , Vol. 1, _Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries_
  3. Ivo Andric, _The Bridge on the Drina_
  4. Required course packets:

    * Thomas A. Emmert, _Serbian Golgotha: Kosovo, 1389_
    * Paul Rycaut, _The Present State of the Ottoman Empire_
    * Eve Levin, _Sex and Society in the World of the Orthodox Slavs_
    * Alfred J. Bannan and Achilles Edelenyi, ed. _Documentary History of Eastern Europe_
    * David M. Crowe, _A History of the Gypsies of Eastern Europe and Russia_
    * Paul Hofmann, _The Viennese: Splendor, Twilight and Exile_
    * Peter Mackridge, "The Greek Intelligentsia, 1780-1830: A Balkan Perspective," in _Balkan Society in the Age of Greek Independence_ , ed. Richard Clogg. 
    * Khristo Botev, "The Sole Salvation Lies in Revolution," in _Man, State and Society in East European History_ , ed. Stephen Fischer-Galati. 
    * Arthur J. Evans, _Through Bosnia and the Herzegovina on Foot_
    * Barbara Jelavich, _A History of the Balkans_ , Vol. 2. _Twentieth Century_. (Excerpt) 
    * Vladimir Dedijer, _The Road to Sarajevo_
    * Perry M. Rogers, ed. _Aspects of Western Civilization_ , Vol. 2  



**Requirements:**

Midterm exam, final paper, quizzes, class attendance and participation.
Students should be prepared to discuss weekly readings as a class or in small
groups. They will be required to prepare an eight-page paper on an assigned
topic.

Assigned reading should be completed by the first meeting of each week, unless
the instructor indicates another timetable. In order to perform well on the
exams and quizzes, students must be familiar with the material presented in
readings, lectures and film clips.

If films are shown outside of class time, attendance will be encouraged but
not required.

**

Grading:

**

Midterm - 30% of course grade

Final paper - 40%

Class participation, including quizzes - 30%

More than two unexcused absences will result in a lower class participation
grade.

Each class session will consist of lecture and discussion, including small
group discussion. Several film clips will be shown in the course of the
quarter.

**

Papers:

**

The paper topic will be distributed in class; papers written on another topic
cannot be accepted. All students are encouraged to submit a rough draft of
their papers in advance.

Final papers must be handed in to the instructor on Wednesday, June 11.
Extensions will be given only in case of an emergency, such as a serious
illness. Computer or printer malfunctions are not acceptable excuses for
lateness. For each day a paper is handed in after the due date, 1/3 of a grade
will be deducted (ie, an A will become an A-; a B- will become a C+). Papers
should be neatly typed or printed on a high-quality printer, using one-inch
margins; they should be well-organized and written in clear and correct
English. Footnotes should be provided.

**

Examinations:

**

The midterm examination must be taken at the scheduled time. Students will be
allowed to take a make-up exam without penalty only for urgent reasons; in
those cases, students will be expected to present proof of the emergency, such
as an excuse from the University Medical Center. Without a valid excuse,
students will be permitted to take a make-up exam, however, their grade will
be reduced by a full letter. Students will be given advance notice of quizzes
and must take them at the scheduled time.

**

Academic dishonesty:

**

Papers and exams must represent the work of the student alone. In papers,
sources must be cited in accordance with standard, scholarly practice.
Plagiarism or cheating will result in a failing grade on the assignment and
other penalties determined by university regulations. Students are encouraged
to consult the instructor if they are uncertain about the proper use of
sources.

**

Note** : Students who have a disability or any condition which may affect
their work in this class should inform me.



**

Topics and Assignments:

**

Week 1 **Historical background, lands and peoples.

**

April 1, 3 reading: Jelavich, 1-36. Study maps.

Week 2 **The Ottoman Conquest and the Kosovo legend.

** April 8, 10 reading: Sugar, 1-34, 43-59. Jelavich, 39-62. Emmert
(coursepacket).

Week 3 **Balkan religions and societies.**

Tues., April 15 MAP QUIZ

April 15, 17 reading: Sugar, 63-77, 104-110, 142-167. Rycaut;  Levin
(coursepacket).

Week 4 **Change in Ottoman Fortunes: The Romanian Principalities.

** April 22, 24 reading: Sugar, 187-208, 233-247. Jelavich, 62-118. Crowe,
107-115; Bannan and Edelenyi, 122-125 (coursepacket).

Week 5 **The Habsburg Monarchy. Bosnian cultures.

** April 29, Sugar, 251-288. Jelavich, 118-168.

May 1, Andric, 1-93.

Week 6 **The early revolutions.**

Tuesday, May 6 MIDTERM EXAMINATION

May 8 reading: Jelavich, 171-234.

Week 7 **Self-Government. Nationalist Ideologies.

** May 13, 15 reading: Jelavich, 235-328. Bannan and Edelenyi, 175-183;
Mackridge (coursepacket).

Week 8 **Rebellion and the occupation of Bosnia.

** May 20, 22 Jelavich, 329-380. Evans, 324-282; Bannan and Edelenyi, 183-194
(coursepacket). Andric, 93-133.

Week 9 **Prelude to war.

** May 27, 29 reading: Jelavich, 2 (coursepacket); Dedijer, Rogers
(coursepacket).

Week 10 **The world of Visegrad

** Mon., June 2 ROUGH DRAFTS DUE

June 3 reading: Andric, 134-214.

June 5 reading: Andric, 215-314

**

Wed., June 11 FINAL PAPERS DUE

**

