### HISTORY 670.02  
UNITED STATES DIPLOMACY, 1900-1945



_Course Description_ : In this course we will study the major trends in early
twentieth century United States foreign policy. The first half of the course
will focus on the United States's emergence as a world power, its projections
of influence in East Asia and Latin America, and its involvement in World War
I and the peacemaking that followed. The second half will concentrate on
American economic policy and strategy in the 1920s, the origins of World War
II, the diplomacy of the Second World War, and the wartime origins of the Cold
War. Lectures and readings will introduce you to historical controversies and
conflicting interpretations of events, which you will be expected to analyze
critically in writing and discussions.



_Academic Objectives_ : From this course you should gain the following skills
and competencies:

  1. To develop the ability to assess and think critically about historical issues and how people interpret those issues; 
  2. To gain a basic factual knowledge of this historical period; 
  3. To develop some skills in analyzing historical data and reaching informed conclusions about those data. 



_Required Books_ : The following books are _required_ reading and should be
available at the bookstores and at the closed reserve desk at the Main
Library.

  1. Walter LaFeber, _The American Age: United States Foreign Policy at Home and Abroad since 1750_
  2. Howard K. Beale, _Theodore Roosevelt and the Rise of America to World Power_
  3. Arthur S. Link, _Woodrow Wilson: Revolution, War, and Peace_
  4. Michael J. Hogan, _Informal Entente: The Private Structure of Cooperation in Anglo-American Economic Diplomacy, 1918-1928_
  5. Robert A. Divine, _Reluctant Belligerent: American Entry into World War II_
  6. Gaddis Smith, _American Diplomacy During the Second World War, 1941-1945_
  7. Emily Rosenberg, _Spreading the American Dream: American Economic and Cultural Expansion, 1890-1945_ 



_Meetings_ : Classes will meet every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday from 9:30
am to 10:48 am. Attendance is mandatory at all class meetings. Attendance will
be taken, at random, five times during the quarter, and you will earn one
point for each time you are recorded present.

_Enrollment_ : All students must be officially enrolled in the course by the
end of the second full week of the quarter. No requests to add the course will
be approved by the department chair after that time. Enrolling officially and
on time is solely the responsibility of the student.

_Examinations_ : The midterm exam will be given during class on February 9 and
the final exam will be administered from 7:30 to 9:18 am on March 15. Both
exams will cover material from lectures and assigned readings and will consist
primarily of essay questions. The final exam will be comprehensive. You will
NOT be permitted to consult books, notebooks, or other aids during the exams.
Any student with an unexcused absence from an exam will earn an E for that
test.

_Make-up exam policy_ : If for any family or medical reason you find it
absolutely necessary to miss an examination, you must contact me before the
exam and have my consent to your absence if you wish to take a make-up exam.
The date and time of any make-up exam will be announced in class.



_Essay_ : You must complete one out-of-class writing assignment based on the
book by Rosenberg. The assignment will be distributed during the first week of
class and will be due Friday, February 25. Early submissions are welcome.
Papers turned in late will be assessed penalties of a half letter grade per
day late. To be fair to all students, no exceptions to this rule will be
granted.

Your essay will be graded on the basis of both content and style. It must be
typed or computer-printed, double-spaced, proofread, and corrected prior to
submission. It should number six to eight pages (1,500 to 2,000 words). You
must attribute the sources of quotations and borrowed ideas by citing page
numbers in the book. If one borrows the words or ideas of others without
acknowledgement, one is guilty of plagiarism. More details on this assignment
will be provided in class.



_Method of determining final grade_ : Your final grade will be determined as
follows:

    
    
         Attendance      5%           Paper         30%
         Midterm exam   25%           Final exam    40%
    
    

In addition to completing these assignments, graduate students enrolled in
this course must write an historiographical essay, on a topic to be approved
by the instructor, worth 10% of their final grades.



_Other expectations_ : Given the size of this class, your colleagues depend on
your cooperation in maintaining a classroom environment conducive to learning.
Late arrivals, early departures, and other disruptive behaviors are strongly
discouraged. On the other hand, you are encouraged to ask questions and raise
substantive issues at all times.

You are expected to maintain the highest standards of academic honesty and
integrity. Cheating, plagiarizing, or practicing other forms of dishonesty
will not be tolerated and, consonant with university regulations, may result
in failure of the course.



_

Suggestions_ :

  1. If you do not understand a course requirement or course material, please ask about it. I am here to help you and welcome opportunities to answer your questions. 
  2. If you do not understand the grading of your examination, please seek clarification at the earliest opportunity. 
  3. Consider the following suggestions to assist you in writing essay exams: 
    1. Always relate exam points to time. If the exam has three sections of equal value, apportion your time equally. DO NOT spend longer on one of the sections than the percent of the grade justifies. 
    2. Before beginning to write, outline your essay to ensure orderliness as you write. Then compose an essay including an introduction, a body of several paragraphs, and a brief concluding paragraph. Following this advice rather than writing down thoughts as they come to mind will help you produce an organized, coherent essay. 
    3. Remember that the prime concern of history is to analyze change over time. When, why, and how the changes occurred and the significance of the changes to American history are central questions in this course. Bear this in mind as you take notes, read, and review. 
    4. I want you to succeed on the exams in general proportion to the time and effort you invest in studying. If this does not happen on the midterm, please talk to me at once.  



_Schedule of assignments_ : Lectures and assignments are _tentatively_
scheduled below. Each class will consist primarily of lecture, but ample time
will be reserved for questions and discussion. Please be prepared to make
thoughtful contributions to each class. Readings are assigned on a weekly
basis. You are expected to familiarize yourself with the topics of reading
assignments and complete them in conjunction with the appropriate lectures.

Jan. 3 Introduction to the course

5 Foundations: American diplomacy to 1890

7 Emergence of the United States as a world power, 1890s

READINGS: LaFeber, (5-180), 181-217; Beale, vii-x, 1-54

10  America enters the world stage, 1898-1900

12 The Open Door in Asia, 1898-1905

14 The Open Door in Asia, 1905-1917

READINGS: LaFeber, 218-25, 235-44; Beale, 55-252

17 HOLIDAY

19 The Closed Door in Latin America, 1898-1905

21 The Closed Door in Latin America, 1905-1917

READINGS: LaFeber, 225-35, 244-52; Beale, 253-462

24 TR on the world stage, 1900-1914

26 Woodrow Wilson and the problem of revolution, 1913-1917

28 The First World War and American neutrality

READINGS: LaFeber, 253-83; Link, 1-128

31 The First World War and American belligerence

Feb. 2 Wilson in Paris: The Versailles Treaty

4 The struggle for ratification

READINGS: LaFeber, 284-315; Rosenberg, 3-234

7 REVIEW

9 MIDTERM EXAM

11 Republican diplomacy in the 1920s: Europe

READINGS: LaFeber, 316-31; Hogan, vii-xii, 1-56

14 Republican diplomacy in the 1920s: Asia

16 Republican diplomacy in the 1920s: Latin America

18 The failure of Republican diplomacy, 1929-33

READINGS: LaFeber, 331-49; Hogan, 57-227

21 Franklin D. Roosevelt and global disorder, 1933-37

23 Origins of the Second World War in Europe

25 ESSAY DUE

Origins of the Second World War in Asia

READINGS: LaFeber, 350-91; Divine, vii-x, 1-164

28 The diplomacy of war in Europe

Mar. 2 The diplomacy of war in Asia

4 The diplomacy of war in the Americas

READINGS: LaFeber, 392-416; Smith, vii-viii, 1-179

7 Origins of the Cold War, 1941-45

9 Onset of the Cold War, 1945

11 REVIEW

READINGS: LaFeber, 416-33



Mar. 15 (Tues.), 7:30-9:18 am FINAL EXAM

