Program in Medieval Studies

Princeton University

609 258-4122

* * *



## [Home](../../index.htm)

## [People](../../people.htm)

## [Calendar](../../calendar.htm)

## [Undergraduate Studies](../../undergrad.htm)

## [Graduate Studies](../../grad.htm)

## [Princeton Resources](../../resources.htm)

## [Mappamundi](../mappa.html)

## [Contact Us](mailto:mjreilly@princeton.edu)

  | **Medieval Studies 227** Professor Michael Curschmann

Spring 00/01 [micur@princeton.edu](mailto:micur@princeton.edu)



**_

THE WORLD OF THE MIDDLE AGES



_**

Syllabus



Note: Texts available for purchase at the U-Store are marked by an asterisk.

Texts identified as "xerox" will be distributed in class at the beginning of
the week.



**Lectures** will be in 106 McCormick. Precept in 104 McCormick.

MED 227 is taught with the aid of a specially designed computer program called
_mappamundi_ that will enable students to use their own computer or the
nearest computer cluster to call up the images shown in the course for further
study and to supplement these visual reminders with verbal explanations and
glosses of various kinds. Explanatory material will be distributed at the
first meeting. And a demonstration of the program will follow on the first
Friday of classes.

_

I. Points of View

_

1\. Feb. 6 Introduction. Time and Space (with slides)

Readings **Primary:** *Bede, _Lives of the Abbots of Wearmouth and Jarrow_ ; *
_The Voyage of St. Brendan_.

**Secondary:** *Peters, _Europe and the Middle Ages_ , 105-158; M. Barber,
_The Two Cities_ , 421-440.

IN LIEU OF THE **FIRST-WEEK PRECEPT** , THE CLASS WILL MEET AT THE SAME HOUR (
**11:00 A.M**.) **ON FRIDAY, FEBRUARY** , IN **_MC CORMICK 106_ ** FOR A
DEMONSTRATION OF THE _MAPPAMUNDI_ PROGRAM.

[Important Glossary Terms and Images in Week 1](week1.html)



2\. February 13 Orality and Literacy

Readings **Primary:** * _The Song of Roland_.

**

Secondary:** M. Clanchy, _From Memory to Written Record_ , 1-21, 224-252.

[Important Glossary Terms and Images in Week 2](week2.html)

3\. Feb. 20 The Book (with slides)

Readings **Primary:** From Eckehart of St. Gall, _The Chronicle of St. Gall_
(xerox); Johannes Hadlaub on the making of the Codex Manesse (xerox); T. G.
Frisch, _Gothic Art_ , 128-137 (xerox).

**Secondary:** M. Clanchy, _From Memory to Written Record_ , 114-144; *E.
Peters, _Europe and the Middle Ages_ , 213-270.

**

PRECEPT IN RARE BOOK ROOM, FIRESTONE!





**

[Important Glossary Terms and Images in Week 3](week3.html)

4\. Feb. 27 Symbols and Images (with slides)

Readings **Primary:** _Bestiary_ , ed. R. Barber, 7-49 (you can also use _The
Book of Beasts,_ ed. T. H. White, 7-35); C. Davis-Weyer, _Early Medieval Art,_
47-49; 164-167 (Gregory the Great; Gilbert Crispin); *E. Holt, _A_
_Documentary History_ , 1-8; 18-62, 88-91, 120-134 (Theophilus; St. Bernard;
Abbot Suger; Gervase of Canterbury).

**Secondary:** G. B. Ladner, "Medieval and Modern Understanding of Symbolism",
in _Speculum_ , 54 (1979), 223-256; Umberto Eco, _Art and Beauty_ , 52-64.

**

PRECEPT IN THE INDEX OF CHRISTIAN ART, MC CORMICK!

**



_

II. Cultural Diversity



[Important Glossary Terms and Images in Week 4](week4.html)

_

5\. March 6 The Germanic North (Iceland) (with slides)



Readings **Primary:** * _Eyrbyggja saga;_ _Voluspa_ (xerox); Snorri Sturlusson
on Germanic myth (xerox).

**Secondary:** P. Foots - D. Wilson, _The Viking Achievement,_

52-64, 336-347. **

**[Important Glossary Terms and Images in Week 5](week5.html)

6\. March 13 The Jews in Western Europe

GUEST LECTURES: M. COHEN

Readings **Primary:** _The Chronicle of Ahimaaz_ , 60-69 (xerox); R. S. Lopez-
I. W. Raymond, _Medieval Trade in the Mediterranean World_ , 29-33 (routes of
Jewish merchants) (xerox).



** **

[Important Glossary Terms and Images in Week 6](week6.html) **

TAKE HOME MIDTERM

FIRST PAPER DUE!

_

Midterm Break



_**

7\. March 27 Byzantium and the West (with slides)

GUEST LECTURE: Tia Kolbaba

Readings **Primary:** _The Works of Liutprand of Cremona_ , trans. by F.A.
Wright, Liudprand of Cremona, Relatio de Legatione Constantinopolitana, trans.
B. Scott, pp. 27-57. From the Chronicles of Fulcher of Chartres and Anna
Comnena (xerox).



[Important Glossary Terms and Images in Week 7](week7.html)

8\. April 3 Islam and Western Europe

GUEST LECTURES: A. HAMORI (Cultural Refinement/Books and Learning)

Readings **Primary:** Ibn Hazm, _The Ring of the Dove_ , 21-38, 87-89,
102-109, 230-231, 248-249; Al-Ghazali, _Tahafut al-falasifah_ ( "Incoherence
of the Philosophers"), 1-3, 13-19; Petrus Alfonsi, _Disciplina Clericalis_ ,
124-125 (all in xerox).

**Secondary:** _The Cambridge History of Arabic Literature_ , vol. 2, 202-218;
C. H. Haskins, _The Renaissance of the Twelfth Century_ , 278-349.

**_ _**_

[Important Glossary Terms and Images in Week 8](week8.html)

III. Vernacularization



_

9\. April 10 Lyric and Musical Drama (with music and slides).

Readings **Primary:** _The Benediktbeuern Passion Play_ , in D. Bevington,
_Medieval Drama,_ 202-223; Adam de la Halle, _The Play of Robin and Marion_ ,
in R. Axton, _Medieval French Plays_ , 257-301. (Musical performances of
_Robin and Marion_ and the _Passion_ are on reserve in the Music Library in
the Woolworth Center).

**Secondary:** B. Ford (ed.), _The New Pelican Guide to English Literature_ 1,
2: _The European Inheritance_ , 150-187.

** **

[Important Glossary Terms and Images in Week 9](week9.html)

10\. April 17 Lyric and Arthurian Romance (with slides and music)

Readings **Primary:** *Wolfram von Eschenbach, _Parzival_ ; Raimbaut de
Vaqueiras, _Kalenda_ _maia_ (xerox); Lambert of Ardes, _History of the Counts
of Guines_. (xerox).

**Secondary:** B. Ford (ed.), _The New Pelican Guide to English Literature_ 1,
2: _The European Inheritance_ , 41-82. (A musical performance of _Kalenda_
_maia_ is on reserve in the Music Library, Woolworth Center).

** **

[Important Glossary Terms and Images in Week 10](week10.html)

11\. April 24 Mysticism: The Women's Movement (with slides)

Readings **Primary:** The works of Hadewijch of Brabant.

**

Secondary: **Frances Beer, _Women and Mystical Experience in the Middle Ages.

_** **

[Important Glossary Terms and Images in Week 11](week11.html)

12\. May 1 Religious and Secular Iconography (with slides)

Readings **Primary:** *Holt, _A Documentary History_ , 134-150 (Cennino
Cennini).

**Secondary:** Eco, _Art and Beauty,_ 92-115.

** **[Important Glossary Terms and Images in Week 12](week12.html) **

SECOND PAPER DUE!

TAKE-HOME FINAL



_

Books on Reserve for MED/HUM 227



_**

(Books on order at U-Store marked with an asterisk)





_

Beguine Spirituality: Mystical Writings of Mechthild of Magdeburg

_

*Peters, Edward, _Europe and the Middle Ages

_

* _The Age of Bede

_

* _Eyrbyggja Saga

_

* _The Song of Roland

_

*Wolfram von Eschenbach, _Parzival

_

*Holt, Elizabeth, _A Documentary History of Art_ , vol. 1

Barber, Malcolm, _The Two Cities

_

Clanchy, Michael, _From Memory to Written Record

_

Foote, P. G. _The Viking Achievement

_

Barber, Richard, _The Penguin Guide to Medieval Europe

_

Mundy, John H. _Europe in the High Middle Ages, 1 st ed.

_

Davis, R.H.C., _A History of Medieval Europe_ , 1st ed.

_

Medieval Literature: The European Inheritance_, vol. I, pts. 1 & 2

McEvedy, C., _The Penguin Atlas of Medieval History

_

Caldwell, J., _Medieval Music

_

Davis-Weyer, Cecilia, _Early Medieval Art, 300-1150

_

Frisch, Teresa, _Gothic Art 1140-1450

_

Theophilus, _The Various Arts

_

Ibn Hazm, _The Ring of the Dove

_

Abbasid Belles-Lettres, _The Cambridge History of Arabic Literature_ , vol. II
(xerox of the relevant portion)

Wightman, G.B.H., _Birds Through a Ceiling of Alabaster

_

Haskins, Charles Homer, _The Renaissance of the Twelfth Century_ (xerox of the
relevant portion)

_

The Book of Beasts_, ed. T.H. White

_

Bestiary_, transl. by Richard Barber

Seltzer, Robert M., _Jewish People, Jewish Thought_ (on reserve for NES 220)

Eco, Umberto, _Art and Beauty

Speculum_ 54 (1979), xerox of article by F. Ladner

_

The Works of Liutprand of Cremona_, trans. By F. A. Wright

_

Digenis Akritas. The Two-Blood Border Lord_, trans. and ed. by D. B. Hull,
Books VII and VII

_

Writing in Gold. Byzantine Society and Its Icons_, R. Cormack

Beer, Frances, _Women and Mystical Experience

_

Axton, R. and Stevens, J. (transl.) _Medieval French Plays_ (xerox)

Bevington, David, _Medieval Drama_ (xerox)

Adam de la Halle, Le Jeu de Robin et Marion, transl. Schwam-Baird



**



**







  
---|---

