![Winter Online](graphics/flag.gif)

  
  

* * *

### History of Art

  
CA/AH 213--Four Quarter Hours

William Christy  
Ohio University--Zanesville Campus  
244 Elson Hall  
Zanesville, OH 43701  
(740) 588-1482  
E-mail: [christyw@ohiou.edu](mailto:christyw@oak.cats.ohiou.edu)  
| ![](graphics/planetearth.gif)

  
  

* * *

|

### Course Description

| Continuation of 212 from early Christina period of Europe through
Renaissance Students advised but not required to enroll in 211, 212, and 213
in sequence. No credit to those with credit for AH 213.  | **Prerequisite** |
none

* * *

| **Methods of Course Instruction** |  All course content is presented on the
World Wide Web; e-mail is used for submission of assignments, as well as for
the instructor's evaluation and comments.

* * *

|

### Materials

|  | **Required**|

Stokstad, _Art History, revised ed.,_ Vol. II, Prentice Hall Publications.
ISBN: 0130825824

Stokstad, _Study Guide for Art History,_ revised edition, Vol. II, Prentice
Hall Publications. ISBN: 0130828726

Companion website for the text:
[**cw.prenhall.com/bookbind/pubbooks/stokstad**](http://cw.prenhall.com/bookbind/pubbooks/stokstad/).

Reid, D.K., _Thinking and Writing about Art History,_ 2nd edition.
ISBN:0130223581

**Note:** Books for the course are in stock at the MATC/OUZ Campus Bookstore
or Specialty Books, (740) 594-4002. [**Click
here**](http://www.specialtybookstore.com) for online ordering.

* * *

|

### **Course Calendar**

|  The following assignments are to be read in advance of our online group
discussions, and, of course, before the tests! The Study Guide that
accompanies the Stokstad text and one that I send you will help you review and
prepare for the tests. Complete the corresponding sections of the guide as you
progress through your reading.

|  Week | Topic  | One | Introduction-art and the artist, looking at art  |
Two | Baroque Art  | Three | Baroque Art and Rococo  | Four | Neoclassicism
and Romanticism | Five | Romanticism and Realism | Six | Impressionism  |
Seven | Rise of Modernism  | Eight | Rise of Modernism | Nine | Art in the US
and Europe Since WWII  | Ten | Art in the US and Europe Since WWII

  

* * *

| **Grading Policy & Standards** |  | 3 On-Line tests | 20% each  | Paper |
20%  | Threaded Discussion | 20%

* * *

| **Academic Dishonesty** |  Plagiarism (the presentation of someone else's
work as one's own) and cheating (dishonesty or deception in fulfilling
academic requirements) will not be tolerated. The appropriate authorities will
be notified of any academic misconduct. Suitable action will be initiated
ranging from failure of assignment, failure of course, and/or formal action by
the office of the University judiciaries. Procedures outlined in the
_Undergraduate Bulletin_ will be followed.

* * *

| **3 On-Line Tests** |  They will take place approximately every three weeks.
These will be mainly objective tests with short answer and essay questions
regarding artworks provided on-line. **The third exam (the final) will be
conducted on Thursday, March 13, 2002 at 5:00PM**

**There are no make-ups for a missed final.**

* * *

| **Paper** |

The term paper should be a comparative analysis of any subject matter that can
be shared between two eras or styles encompassed in CA 213. It should be
between 8-10 pages in length, typewritten with accompanying examples included
and have a bibliography and footnotes. You must have the topic approved by me
before you start your research. Sources for your research can include museums
and galleries in the area as well as on the Internet, and major references
found in any library. Poor grammar and typographical errors will result in
letter grade reduction, so proofread your papers! If you don't know what a
footnote is, tell me, or find out for yourself, because you need to use them
in your papers. I will deduct if you don't include them!

|  Deadlines:  | January 24--turn in topic  | February 7--turn in outline  |
February 28--completed paper due

**If the paper is not turned in on February 28, 2002 by 5:00pm, you will
receive an "F" on the paper.**

**

You can mail your paper to me or drop it off when you happen to come on
campus. **

* * *

|  **Threaded  
Discussions** |  The Threaded Discussion/Chat will be your participation
grade. We will meet online Wednesday evenings at 8:30pm using AOL Instant
Messenger chat rooms, to discuss topics from your reading. Participation is
required. Be aware that a normal AOL account will not work with AOL Instant
Messenger chat rooms.

* * *

| **How to pass this Internet Course** |  Art History as an Internet course
requires a great deal of self-discipline and work on the part of the student.
You will be taking this course at your own pace to a certain degree. Read the
assigned text chapters. Your Study Guides that accompany the Stokstad texts
are a great way to prepare for the tests; fill out the appropriate sections as
you read, and review them when studying for the test. Make sure you visit the
course website regularly. We will try to meet online as aclass to discuss
various topics related to the assignments, as well as answer questions
concerning the course. I will email you about these meetings.

* * *

| **Technical  
Requirements**|  **Hardware**  
Windows PC (486 or better processor, minimum 8MB RAM, DOS 5.0 or higher,
Windows 3.x or Windows 95/98)

Macintosh (68030 or better processor, minimum 8 MB real RAM, system 6.07 or
higher)

SLIPP/PPP Internet connection (if using modem connection, at least 14,400
kbps); connection must not have firewalls preventing access.

**Software**  
Graphical browser (level of Netscape 3.1 or higher)

Standard e-mail communication software

* * *

| **Enrollment  
Information**|  **Active Terms:** Term-based; 10 week quarter system

**Registration Dates:** October 22, 2001-January 8, 2002

Call the [**Ohio University Online
Staff**](file:///harddrive/Web%20Pages/HTML/index.html) at 1-888-551-6446 if
you have questions about this course or the enrollment process.

Call the education counselors in the Division of Lifelong Learning at (740)
593-2150 if you have questions about Ohio University Degree Opportunities.

