**

HISTORY 1112

**

World Civilization since 1650

Spring Semester 2001 January 10 - May 7

Dr. Thomas D. Veve 122 Memorial Hall

Office Phone: 272-2491

Office Hours: Mondays and Wednesdays, 5:00 p.m. - 6:00 p.m., or by
appointment.

Email address: tveve@em.daltonstate.edu

Website address: http://www.daltonstate.edu/faculty/tveve/

"What is history but a fable agreed upon" - Napoleon.

**

Required Texts** :

T. Walter Wallbank, Alastair M. Taylor, et al. _Civilization Past & Present_.
HarperCollins. 9th edition. Volume 2.

Erich Maria Remarque. _All Quiet on the Western Front_.

**

Course Description** : Surveys the history of civilization in the modern era
from 1650 to the present. While the perspective of the course is global, the
development of Western ideals and institutions and their expansion on a world-
wide scale serve as the basic organizing principles of the course. A
continuation of HIST 1111 but may be taken independently.

**

Course Objective** : History 1112 is the study of man and his environment from
1650 to the present time, and while the course provides a glance at several
civilizations, the course concentrates on western civilization because of its
connection with the American lifestyle. This course will be conducted along a
topical basis, rather than through a chronological sequence. We will place
special emphasis on the French Revolution and Napoleonic Era, the era of
European dominance around the globe, World War I, the rise of the totalitarian
powers and World War II.

**

Divisional Goal Statement**: The Division of Social Science assists students
in developing an ability to acquire data, understand relationships, process
information, draw conclusions, and critically evaluate issues related to the
society and culture of the United States, both internally and externally.

**

Intended Student Learning Outcomes** : Upon successful completion of History
1112

1\. Students will articulate understandings of course materials acquired
through listening, reading, graphics, experiments, computations, and
electronic media.

2\. Students will articulate and analyze issues from different perspectives
and be opened to viewpoints other than their own.

3\. Students will analyze social institutions and human behavior using
appropriate disciplinary frameworks.

4\. Students will have an awareness of America=s role in and impact upon world
affairs.

5\. Students will retain a characteristic overview of basic historical periods
so as to perpetuate American historical traditions.



**

Course Evaluation** : Grades will be determined on the following basis. There
will be four examinations during the course, each worth 25% of the final
grade. The four exams will be self-contained with no carry over material from
the previous exam. Tests will cover **both** material from the textbook
assigned readings and from class lectures. **You must take all four
examinations to successfully complete this course**. See the class calendar
for the appropriate test dates. Tests normally will be returned to each
student no later than the next class session.

Examinations will include objective short answer questions of the multiple
choice, matching, and true-false variety and may also include essay questions.

Makeup exams will be given only under the most extraordinary and catastrophic
circumstances. If you miss an exam, a written excuse signed by your physician
or other appropriate person, must

be submitted to me before any make up exam will be given. **Makeup exams will
be of the objective short answer and essay variety**. There will be at least
two essay questions on the

makeup tests. **Any** exam which is not taken during the assigned scheduled
period for **any** reason

will be considered a makeup exam. You must complete the makeup exam no later
than one week after the scheduled exam has taken place. Failure to do so will
result in the grade of "0" for that test.

**

Grading** : The following grade scale will be used for all work and for
calculation of the final grade:

A 90-100

B 80-89.99

C 70-79.99

D 60-69.99

F Below 60

**

**No curve in the scoring system is expressed or implied.**

Cheating**: Every student is expected and required to do his or her own work
in this course and all other courses at Dalton College. Any instances of
cheating or plagiarism, as expressed in the 2000-2001 college catalog and
student handbook, academic irregularities (see catalog page 64), will be
reported to the Chairperson, Division of Social Science, and to the Vice
President for Student Affairs. Dismissal from the course with a grade of **F**
is the minimum penalty; other measures may be taken by the Dalton State
College Discipline Committee as warranted. Cheating in any form will not be
tolerated. Cheating can best be described as any situation in which one
student has an advantage that other students do not have under normal
circumstances.

**

Withdrawal from the course** : Students wishing to withdraw from the course
may do so without penalty until the mid-point of the semester, and a grade of
**W** will be assigned. After that point, withdrawal without penalty is
permitted only in cases of extreme hardship as determined by the Vice
President for Academic Affairs; otherwise a grade of **WF** will be issued.
(Please note: At Dalton State College, the Hardship Withdrawal process
requires students to withdraw from all classes at the college.) Students who
disappear, completing neither the official withdrawal procedure nor the course
work, will receive the grade of **F**. **This instructor will not withdraw
students from the class. Withdrawal from class is a student responsibility**.
The mid-point of the semester is **Friday, March 23, 2001.

** **

Attendance** : Students are expected to attend class. Because I believe that
class attendance is essential to success and a correlation can be made between
the two, I will keep an attendance record. While it is not necessary to keep
me informed of your whereabouts, you are responsible for all work missed.

**

Class Procedures** : Class format consists primarily of lectures or suitable
audio-visual teaching aids. Class discussion is strongly encouraged, and is
appropriate throughout the course. Questions, observations, and comments
relevant to the teaching material are always welcomed. **__ All students are
expected to read the text. Again, I remind each student that examination

material is not limited to class lectures, and tests will include material
from the text readings which may or may not have been covered in class.

_ **_

Synergy (syn-er-gy) _n_., _pl_.-gies. 1. The interaction of two or more agents
or forces so that their combined effect is greater than the sum of their
individual effects. 2. Cooperative interaction among groups, such as
corporative subsidiaries, that creates an enhanced combined effect. [Gk.
_Sunergia_ , cooperation< _sunergos_ , working together.]

A college education is built around a synergistic pedagogical combination of
reading, professorial input, and student interaction. If you do not read you
assigned material, or if you fail to interact with other students or access
their knowledge, and if you rely solely on the instructor=s lectures, your
college educational experience will be less than that of those students who
combine all three aspects.

**

Disability Support Services/ADA Accommodations** :

Students with disabilities or special needs of any type should contact
Disability Support Services Office in the ACE Center to request reasonable
accommodations for academic programs and other activities of Dalton State
College. Students must personally register with Disability Support Services by
providing adequate documentation to verify the disability and/or need. A
minimum of five to ten business days is needed for approved accommodations to
be arranged. The ACE Center is located on the lower level of the Pope Student
Center.

I wish to remind all students that disabilities are a private matter and will
be handled by this professor on such a basis.

**_





Class Meetings/Program of Instruction/Reading Assignments

**_

Week 1. January 10. Course Introduction. The Old Regime. Text chapters 19-20.

Week 2. January 17. The Old Regime and the Enlightenment. Text chapters 19-21.
**College closed, Monday, January 15, Martin Luther King Day.

**

Week 3. January 22 & 24\. The Enlightenment and the French Revolution. Text
chapters 21-22.

Week 4. January 29 & 31\. The French Revolution. Text chapter 22.

Week 5. February 5 & 7\. The Napoleonic Revolution. Text chapter 22. **First
Examination, Wednesday, February 7.

**

Week 6. February 12 & 14\. The Napoleonic Revolution. Text chapter 22. Also
read AThe Career of Napoleon Bonaparte@ from Robert Holtman, _The Napoleonic
Revolution_ (found on reserve at the Roberts Library circulation desk-9
pages).

Week 7. February 19 & 21\. European Politics 1815-1871. Text chapter 25.

Week 8. February 26 & 28\. European Politics 1871-1914. Text chapter 26.

**

Second Examination, Wednesday, February 28.**

**

College closed Monday through Friday, March 5-9, for Spring Break.

**

Week 9. March 12 & 14\. World War I. Text chapter 30 and _All Quiet on the
Western Front_.

Week 10. March 19 & 21\. World War I. Text chapter 30 and _All Quiet on the
Western Front_.

**

Last day to drop class without penalty is Friday, March 23, 2001.

**

Week 11. March 26 & 28\. The Rise of Totalitarianism. Text chapters 31.

Week 12. April 2 & 4\. World War II. Text chapter 33.

**

Third Examination: Wednesday, April 4.

**

Week 13. April 9 & 11\. World War II. Text chapter 33.

Week 14. April 16 & 18\. The Cold War. Text chapter 34-35

Week 15. April 23 & 25\. The Developing World. Text chapter 36.

Week 16. April 30 & May 2.

**

Fourth (Final) Examination: Monday, May 7, 6:10 p.m.- 8:10 p.m.

**

I have received and read a copy of the course syllabus for History 1112 for
the Spring Semester, 2001. I fully understand the course requirements, grading
scale, testing procedures, attendance standards, and the University System of
Georgia standards concerning cheating.



Printed Name_______________________________ Date_______________



Signature__________________________



Telephone number where you can most easily be located______________________

