# **HIS 101**

* * *

**Instructor:**  
Dr. Betsy Hertzler  
461-7583, Office # 77  
**Office Hours:**  
Monday through Friday, 9 - 10:00  
**Text:**  
Western Civilization(second edition)  
author: Jackson J. Spielvogel

* * *

**Tentative Class Schedule:**

Week 1

Introductions, class expectations, syllabus

Introduction to the post-Roman era

Byzantine, Islamic, and Early Western worlds (Chapter 7)



Week 2

Continuation of Byzantium, Islam, and Early Western Europe

Group projects



Week 3

Early Middle Ages - economics and politics (Chapter 8)



Week 4

Early Middle Ages - religious and intellectual life (Chapter 8)

Group projects



Week 5

High Middle Ages - recovery and growth (Chapter 9)



Week 6

The High Middle Ages (Chapter 10)



Week 7

Crusades and culture (Chapter 11)



Week 8

Late Middle Ages (Chapter 12)



Mid-term on March 3



Week 9

The Renaissance (Chapter 13)

Group projects



Week 10

The Reformation - Chapter 14



Week 11

Early modern Europe (Chapter 15)

Group projects

Week 12

Economy and society of early modern Europe (Chapter 16)



Week 13

The Scientific Revolution (Chapter 17)





PROJECTS/PRESENTATIONS DUE



Week 14

The Age of Enlightenment (Chapter 18)



Week 15

The Age of Absolutism (Chapter 19)



Week 16

The Revolutionary Era (Chapter 20)



Week 17

FINAL, MAY 10 at 9:30



**II. Grading policy**

A. Attendance/quizzes 15%

B. Mid-term 25%

C. Project/presentation 25%

D. Final 25%

E. Group projects 10%

(will be done in class)

**III. General comments**

One of the reasons I enjoy teaching in a community college setting is because
the students are adults and are responsible for their own behavior.
Consequently I assume that we have a two-way contract: I will do my best to
come to class well-prepared and present interesting material in as many
different formats as possible. Your end of the bargain, then, is to read the
material before coming to class because there will be frequent question and
answer sessions in which I will be asking for responses from the class based
on the reading.

The intent of the frequent quizzes is to provide me with feedback as to which
content areas and concepts need further review, as well as to alert you as to
potential problems with successful completion of the course. The lectures will
contain some information which is not in your text. Quizzes and and exams will
be based on material covered in lecture, your reading, and presentations from
the in-class group projects. Therefore if you miss a class, please contact a
class member or me. The mid-term and final will contain three sections:
identification, multiple choice, and essay questions. A review guide will be
distributed prior to each exam and the material will be reviewed in class
(although specific questions on the review sheet will not be answered).

The group projects (item E in the Grading Policy) are designed to give you an
opportunity to work in a group setting and work with original documents.
Specific instructions will be given at the time. The class activities include
in-class activities in order to give you a chance to become better acquainted
with at least some of the other students. Community college students tend to
have busy lives and typically don't spend much time on campus. On the other
hand, research indicates that student to student contact is the second most
important factor in student success and retention. Incidentally the most
important component for success is the amount of time spent studying (no
surprise there) and the third factor (after student to student contact) is
student to faculty contact outside of class. With that in mind, let me
encourage you to drop by my office before or after class or make an
appointment to see me so we can become better acquainted.

The project referred to item C of the Grading Policy is intended to give each
student an opportunity to choose the format he or she wishes to use while
doing individual research on a specific item, person, event, etc. included in
the time frame of the course (that is from the fall of Rome to the French
Revolution). If you choose to do a research paper, it must be at least six
pages in length with a bibliography of at least three sources (the text does
not count as one of the sources). Your grade on the paper will be based on the
amount of research represented as well as an indication that you have added
some interpretation, conclusion, or concept of your own . In other words, I am
not looking for a book report but rather, I am looking for creativity on your
part based on your research. Consult me for specifics on the format of the
paper. It is possible to use some other medium such as a group presentation to
the class and may include a student-produced video, for example.

Let me remind you of some institutional policies and dates. If you need
special assistance of any kind in the classroom, either in terms of access or
support (for example, a notetaker or sign language interpreter), please
consult Special Services and let me know so I can make the necessary
adjustments. The college catalog will also be the source for all class
policies (such as attendance, student conduct, etc.) If you have any questions
about any of this, please contact me. I look forward to working with you!

