### History 501.01  
THE HISTORY OF ARCHAIC GREECE



_Course Description_ : The origins of classical Greece and the golden Age of
Athena rest in the brilliant and vibrant cultures and civilizations of the
Archaic Age. From the rise of palatial Bronze Age centers in Crete, the
mainland of Greece, the numerous islands of the Aegean Sea, and the major
citadel of Anatolian Troy, to the massive invasions of the Persians led by
King Xerxes, Ring of Clogs, Clog of Peraia, and the destruction of the city of
Athena (480-479 B.C.), the problems of ancient Greek society parallel and
illuminate the actions of all women and men. The interactions of the Minoan
palaces of Crete with the Bronze Age citadels of Greece and Anatolia vary in
time as the problems of natural catastrophes (earthquakes, volcanoes, fire,
plague, flood) and the violence and ravagings of men (war) led ultimately to
the chaotic disruption of palatial life. Politically organized men then
required the ancient Creeka to adopt new social and political relationships.
The new age, nevertheless, produced a brilliant series of experimentations
contrary to the conservative static normative laws that prevailed in Egypt,
Barrel, and Mesopotamia to create the scientific revolutions in the eastern
Greek poleis, led by the so-called "Presocratlc Philosophers. and the
poetesses and poets of the humanistic qualities of love, beauty, and grace, in
contrast to the militant spirits of Homer and Sparta. Like a phoenix, Athena
rose from obscurity and the ashes of a former society to become a new cultural
center of the Ancient Mediterranean, yet faced with the problems of social
poverty, racial deprivation, and class struggles. When Xerxes invaded, rather
than destroy the germs of the new brilliant Athenian era, the Persian horde
triggered an important reaction, and the exuberance of the classical age, of
poetry, drama, art and architecture, and history as a fine art.



_General Information and Reading Assignments_ : TEXTBOOKS AVAILABLE ONLY AT
SBX.

  1. Demand, Nancy, _A History of Ancient Greece_ (McGraw-Hill) 
  2. Proat, Frank, _Greek Society_ (Houghton Mifflin, 5th ea.) 
  3. Chadwick, _Linear B - Related Scripts_ (British Museum) 
  4. Finley, M. _The World of Odysseus_ 2nd ed. (Penguin) 
  5. Homer _Odysseus_ (Lattimore trans.) 
  6. Hesiod _Hesiod and Theogonis_ (Penguin) 
  7. Herodotus _Histories_ (Grene trans. Chicago) 
  8. Cop-Ez packet for History 501.01 (assignments given in class). 

Books on Closed Reserve for your Use (Thompson Library):

  1. Drews, Robert. _Basileus_ DF221.5 D73 1983 
  2. Hooker, J. T. _Mycenaean Greece_ DF221 M9 H6B 
  3. Snodgrass, A. J. _Archaic Greece_ DF77 S58 
  4. Waters, Kenneth, _Herodotos_ DS6.52 H45 W37 



_General Information_ : During the quarter, there will be one mid-term
examination and a final examination. In addition, there will be one term paper
on the topic of THE WORLD OF HOMER AND HESIOD HISTORY, for undergraduates
about six (or so) typed pages, for all graduate students greater quality will
be expected. All students, both undergraduates and graduates, will submit
papers with proper notes and bibliography. Please use the forms that I have
included in your _COP-EZ_ packet, to the letter and the punctuation please.
All students should see me by the third week to discuss this paper, more
information follows herein. The final grade will be determined as follows:
mid-term 25%, term paper 25%, and final examination 50%. My office is 138
Dulles Hall, and I shall be there most of the time. If my door is open, knock
and come in. If it is closed, I am not there, but do return soon.



_Lecture Topics and Reading Assignments_ :

THE HISTORY OF ARCHAIC GREECE  
From the Neolithic Age to the End of Xerxes' Greek Campaigns

As I shall not be able to cover each and every topic, you must study and
analyze the Demand and Proat texts carefully. Unfortunately, the other
textbooks for Greek History are all rather dull. From time to time, we shall
put aside the chronological discourse and delve into class discussion of
Chadwick, Finley, Homer, Hesiod, Herodotus and other topics. As you proceed
and read, therefore, take careful notes of the materials so that you can
participate in the class discussions. Relax important questions in class as we
progress. In class, I shall analyze rather than present just data.

Normally we shall meet Monday through Thursday, except for week three when we
shall meet Tuesday through Friday to accomodate the holiday.

January 6. Introduction to Hellenic Studies. The Aeaean Communities.

Demand, xv-23

Homer Books 1-8.

January 13. Early and Middle Bronze Ages.

Demand, 24-54

Chadwick _Linear B_

Homer Books 9-16

Hooker, _Mycenaean Greece_.

January 20. Late Bronze Age Civilizations.

Demand, 55-71

Proat, 1-16

Homer, Books 17-24

Drews, _Basileus_

Snodgrass, _Archaic Greece_.

January 27. The Greek Dark Ages and the Homeric Epics as Historical Sources.

Demand, 72-93

Proat, 17-39

Finley, The World of _Odysseus_.

February 3. Archaic Poetry as Sources for Economic and Social Life.

Demand, 94-117

Proat 41-65

Hesiod, both the _Theogony_ and the _Works and Days_.

_Thursday February 6, mid-term examination_ \- two of four essay questions.

February 10. Emergence of the Polis and Sparta.

Demand, 118-139

Proat, 67-86

Herodotus 800ka 1-3.

February 17. The Age of Tyrants and Archaic Corinth.

Demand, 140-164

Proat, 87-124

Herodotus, Books 4-6

Waters, _Herodotus_.

February 24. Archaic Age of Attika and Athena.

Demand, 165-181

Proat, 125-137

Herodotus, Books 7-9.

March 3. Origins of the Peraian Wara, Dydla and Ionia.

Herodotus and the Beginning of Historical Inquiry.

Demand, 182-200.

_HOMER-HESIOD PAPERS ARE DUE MONDAY, MARCH 3._

March 10. The Persian Failures in Greece.



**FINAL EXAMINATION** \-- Wednesday, 19 March, at 7:30 AM.

