![](../graphics/didymaface2.jpg)

Ancient Greece

Department of History, CSUS

Professor [Henry Chambers](mailto:hchamber@csus.edu)

Tuesday/Thursday: 7:30 AM in Library 53

Televised: Sacramento Ch. 71- West Sac Ch19 - Auburn Ch 21

Sierra College Learning Resource Center 318

CSUS Dorms: check the dorm office for the schedule

Section II in Shasta Hall 132 for exams

Office: Tahoe Hall 3080 - Tues/Thurs: 9-10 AM & By Appt.

Email: hchamber@csus.edu

|  
---|---  
  
A survey of Ancient Greece from the Mycenaean Bronze Age to the Alexandrian
Conquests. This survey will emphasize the political, social, cultural, and
economic institutions and values that Hellas created to revolutionize the
Ancient Mediterranean history.

**Learning Objectives:**

1\. To study the development of the Hellenic Polis as it developed in Athens.
To accomplish this the course will include these topics:  Mycenaean Linear B,
Bronze Age Social and Economic Structures, Archaic Political and Social
Institutions, Homeric Poetry as cultural guides, Hellenic religious practices,
Integration of the Peasant into the Polis System, Status of Women within the
Varied Poleis, Slavery and the Ancient Economy, Socrates and the Sophistic
Revolution, Art and Architecture as Cultural Reflections,  the Hellenic Value
System, Athenian Democratic Values and Structures, Thucydides and the
Peloponnesian Wars and how the polis disintegrated under the strains of war in
the late Fifth and Fourth Centuries.

2\. Most importantly, the course will address the historical factors that
explain the unique revolution in ancient history that was Classical Greece.
Why did Greece redirect historical culture? The answer lies in the polis. What
was it and why did it develop so?

3\. The course will improve student writing skills through two formal papers
and two essay exams.

4\. Students will advance their computer skills by researching one paper topic
on the Web and by accessing all their notes, assignments, emails, and grades
via WebCt.

Syllabus

|

**I**. _**Introduction to Hellenic History: Geography and Historic Periods.**_

Structure of Course and Assignments

Major Regions and Sites

Realities of Economic and Geographic Limitations

|

Test Out WebCt

| August 28-30  
---|---|---  
  
**II**. _**Bronze Age Greece: Minoans, Mycenaeans, and Troy**_

Minoan and Near Eastern Religious/Artistic Inheritances

Mycenaean Palace Warehouse Economies

Linear B Texts: Peasant Landholding Systems

Troy and the Collapse of Mycenaen Society

|

Readings: Pomeroy, Ancient Greece, pp. 1-40

WebCt Files on Linear B

Powerpoint Presentation

Sourcebook: Images of Mycenae

| Sept. 4-6  
  
**III**. _**Archaic Hellas and the Homeric Tradition**_

Homer as Shaper of Hellenic Culture

Hellenic Tribal Society and the Oikos: "Synoikism" \- Peasant Social
Structures

Near Eastern Cultural Influences Upon Archaic Greece: Egypt, Assyria,
Phoenicia, and Anatolia

Colonization and Early Pottery

|

Readings: Pomeroy, 41-80.

Quiz #1: Bronze Age Greece

| Sept. 11-13  
  
**IV**. _**Archaic Polis: Sparta**_

Variant Versions of the Polis. Why?

What Constitutes a Polis? City-State-Community! Peasant Landholder into Polis
Citizen

Archaic Social Structures: Aristoi Tribal Leaders, Peasant, and Slave

Sparta: Oligarchy or Peasant Integration

|

Readings: Pomeroy, 82-130.

Sourcebook: Hoplite Soldier on Vases, Documents on the Hoplite Revolution,
Rise of Tyranny, Plutarch's Live of Solon.

| Sept. 18-20  
  
**V**. _**Archaic Athens**_ **.**

Solon's Justice

Kleisthenes' Integration of the Peasant

|

Readings: Pomeroy, 131-157, 159-181.

Quiz #2: Archaic Greece

| Sept. 25-27  
  
**VI**. _The Persian Wars as the Crucible of Hellas_

Sparta, Athens, and the Defense of Hellas

Peloponnesian and Delian Leagues

|

Readings: Pomeroy, 178-199.

Sourcebook: Herodotus, Battle of Marathon

| Oct. 2-4  
**VII**. **Examination** |  WebCt Bulletin Board Study Sessions | Oct. 9  
  
**VIII**. _**Athenian Society. What Made a Citizen?**_

Athens as an Imperial Ruler: the Empire

Political, Social, and Economic Values

Citizen as Peasant

How Did the Demos Function: Nuts and Bolts?

|

Readings: Pomeroy, 201-244.

Quiz #3: Athenian Democracy

| Oct. 12-16  
  
**IX**. _**Social Classes**_

Family and Clan: Oikos Writ Large

Metics, the Resident Aliens

Legal and Social Status of Women

Sexual Mores in Classical Hellas: Homosexuality, Courtesans, and Hellenic
Family Life

Slave Classes in Athens: Rights and Realities

| Readings: Pomeroy, 201-244. | Oct. 18-23  
  
**X**. _**Hellas As Intellectual Revolutionary**_

Sophistic Revolution

Socrates and the New Sophos

Herodotus, Thucydides and the Creation of Historia

|

Readings: Pomeroy, 246-285.

Sourcebook: Socrates' Apology

Quiz #4: Hellenic Social and Intellectual Conditions

| Oct. 25-30  
**Web Paper Due** |    | November 1  
  
**XI. _The Peloponnesian Wars: Causes and Early Stages_**

Athens' Imperial Expansion, 478-434 BC

Definition of Dunamis or Power

Athens as a New Form of Dunamis

Nous as the Psyche of Athens

Corcyra, Potidaea and Megara as Causes for Conflict

|

Readings: Pomeroy, 287-328.

Thucydides, Bk. I.

| Nov. 1-6  
  
**XII _Athens and the Moral Dilemma of War_**

Hellenic Oratory and Sophistic Analysis under the Pressures of War

Pericles' Funeral Oration and the Plague

Role of Moral Laws in Historical Analysis

Mytilenian Debate: Expediency and Justice

Corcyrean Civil War: Failure of Laws in Society

|

Readings: Pomeroy, 287-328.

Thucydides, Bl II, 33-54, "Funeral Oration and the Plague"; II,60-66,"Defense
of Empire"; III, 1-50, Mytilenian Debate"; III 69-90, "Corcyra"; IV,
17-41,"Pylos"; V, 13-24, Peace of Nikias."

Quiz #5: Thucydides Analysis of the War.

| Nov. 8-13  
  
**XIII. _War and the Destruction of the Polis_**

Melian Dialogue: Justice and Power

Nature of Empire: Syracusan Expedition

Athenian Defeat: Failure of Nous

|

Readings: Pomeroy, 308-319.

Thucydides, V, 84-116; VI, 8-25; Vii, 84-87

| Nov. 15-20  
**Paper II on Thucydides** |    | Nov. 30  
  
**XIV. _Hellas as Cultural Revolutionary_**

Greek Art and Architecture: Order and Proportionality

Sculpture , Temples, and Pottery

Acropolis Temples and Marbles

|

Readings: Pomeroy, 274-285.

Quiz #6: Greek Art and Architecture

| Nov. 27-29  
  
**XV. _Alexander and the Hellenic Inheritance_**

Alexander as Visionary, Military Genius, or Historical Accident?

Integration of Eastern Mediterranean into an Hellenic World. How extensive?

Continued Near Eastern Social and Economic Institutions

Rome as the Final Hellenic Conquest

Hellenism and Christianity: Institutionalization of the Classical Tradition.

| Readings: Pomeroy, 395-475 | Dec. 4-6  
  
Assignments

**Assignment** |

**Percentage** |

**Due Date**  
---|---|---  
  
Exams must be taken on campus. Students unable to take the exams at the
scheduled time or day may with clearance take the exams at the Testing
Service. Papers may be submitted via computer or dropped off in the Department
of History Office in Brighton Hall. Students who submit papers as attached
documents should retain copies of the papers until all grades have been posted
at course conclusion. Electronic papers oftentimes have transmission problems
arriving at the instructor's computer. So be aware of this possibility.  |   |  
  
Exam I -Essay and Short Answer (Bluebook)  |

25%  |

Oct 9, 2001  
  
Exam II - Essay and Short Answer (Bluebook)  |

25%  | Thursday, December 13, at 8:00 AM  
Four Quizes from Six Taken | 10% | Various  
  
Paper I on a Web Topic (Five pages)  |

20%  |

November 1  
  
Paper II on Thucydides (Five pages)  |

20%  |

November 30  
  
Grades

**A** |

100-90 points per assignment  
---|---  
  
**B** |

80-89 points  
  
**C** |

70-79 points  
  
**D** |

60-69 points  
  
**F** |

0-59 points  
  
Reading Materials

  * Sarah Pomeroy et al. **Ancient Greece**. Oxford, 1999. 
  * Thucydides. **The Peloponnesian Wars.** Translated by Steven Lattimore. Hackett, 1998. 
  * Ancient Source Book at http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/ancient/asbook2.html#Greece 
  * Class Notes. WebCt Course Site 
  * Powerpoints. WebCt Site 

Other Materials

Students must have a Saclink account with CSUS and access to a computer with a
web navigator. Campus computers are available to those who may not have their
own computers. Netscape works best with the materials.

> Ancient Greece has a WebCt site where class notes, powerpoint presentations,
email and a bulletin board are available. Student Grades will be posted on
WebCt. Students access WebCt via their web navigator with their saclink
account number and password. The address for WebCt is --
**http://online.csus.edu/**

>

> Examinations will consist of one essay to be answered from two choices for
50% of an exam. Ten short answers to items selected from a choice of fifteen
constitute the remaining 50% of each exam. Study questions and short answers
will be available on  
>  WebCt about ten days before both exams. It is expected that the class will
prepare for the exams in an electronic study group on the WebCt.

>

> Six multiple choice quizes with ten questions each will be available for a
week or so during the term to assure students keep up with the readings and
lectures. Students may take each quiz twice with the highest grade posted on
the WEbCt site. The four highest grades will be counted for 10% of the course
grade.

>

> Papers: Two five page papers: one on topics from sections from Thucydides'
readings. Actual assignments will be provided later. For the secondweb paper
students may choose topics that interest them.

>

> Students enrolled in Section II are welcome in the television classroom \-
Library 53 - after the first class meeting, if they wish to attend the actual
class meetings. It is not necessary to attend the first class meeting if
students have access to cable. All materials are available online. Normally
most students tape the class sessions at the 7:30 AM sessions and watch the
videotapes at their leisure. Students, however, are advised not to allow more
than two class meetings to pass before watching the tapes. The course covers a
great deal of material, which requires regular absorption!

>

> Course Survey: The course survey is available for students to take online.
The survey is accessed via the WebCt homepage for the course. Just click on on
the title "Course Evaluation." Extra credit in the form of a quiz grade of 100
pts will be given for completing the survey.

November, 2001

