### History 501.03  
History of the Eastern Mediterranean during the Bronze Age



_Textbooks_ (available at SBX):

  1. Vermeule, Emily. _Greece in the Bronze Age_ (Chicago 1964). 
  2. Chadwick, John. _Linear B and Related Scripts_ (British Museum 1987). 
  3. Chadwick, John. _The Decipherment of Linear B_ (Cambridge 1989). 
  4. Balcer, _Bronze Age_ at Cop-Ez in basement of Bricker Hall 



_Important Dates_ :

    
    
         Mid-Term Examination:  1 February, Thursday.
         Final Examination:     14 March, Thursday, 7:30 AM.
    
         First Paper Due:       11 January, Thursday.
         Second Paper Due:      25 January, Thursday.
         Third Paper Due:       15 February, Thursday.
         Fourth Paper Due:      29 February, Thursday.
    
    

_Course work_ :

Four papers will be due during the course of the term, as noted on the
schedule (no papers will be accepted late). Undergraduate students are
required to submit a 5 page typed essay on each topic. Graduate students will
submit a 7 page typed essay. Each essay _must_ (MUST, MUST, MUST) contain
(both undergraduate and graduate papers) a proper bibliography, even if only
one entry, and note all sources of information within the essay by the proper
use of many, many footnotes (see  "TIPS" in the Cop-Ez book). _Papers that do
not document information thoroughly (many, MANY notes) and properly (correct
form) will not be acceptable._

The books for these papers (#1-3) are on closed reserve in the Fine Arts
Library. The books for paper #4 are on closed reserve in the Thompson Library.
Good Luck! Don't get run over!

PAPER #1. Read as much of Schliemann's writings as possible, from several
books and many different sections. Consider the archaeological methods, goals,
and the questions of Heinrich Schliemann in relationship to the study of
historical-archaeological methods as discussed in class -- essentially
function vs. form and the Binford holistic School. What questions of function
does Schliemann raise? (I am not interested in his schooling or his marital
life -- But I am interested in his archaeological techniques.) Write an essay
assessing and discussing the "Archaeology of H. Schliemann," or some other
exciting title. **THE KEY** TO THIS PAPER IS SCHLIEMANN'S TECHNICS, NOT THE
OBJECTS THEMSELVES.

PAPER #2. Minoan Studies. Using the Index to Evan's multivolume study of
Knossos, select a topic of your interest, something that you find interesting
(you may discuss the matter with me), and -- in light of your paper on
Schliemann and his techniques and the question of form vs. function -- write a
critical, historical-archaeological essay on that topic and its function as it
relates to Minoan-society, e.g. bull-cult, mother-goddess, shrines, frescoes,
armor, throne-rooms, villas, tombs, double-axe, etc. AGAIN, THE KEY TO THIS
PAPER IS EVAN'S TECHNICS, NOT THE OBJECTS THEMSELVES.

PAPER #3. Mycenaean Studies. Turn to Blegen's volumes on either Troy or Pylos,
and, as with Knossos, choose a topic of interest to you and write a critical
historical-archaeological essay on that topic as it relates to the question of
function vs. form, and as it relates to either Trojan society or to Pylian
society. Again, you may want to discuss the matter with me first. Choose a
topic that is markedly different from that of Knossos. AS WITH THE ABOVE TWO
PAPERS, THE KEY IS BLEGEN'S TECHNICS.

PAPER #4. Linear B Studies. After having read Chadwick on Linear B and related
topics (his two books you purchased), turn to Michael Ventris and John
Chadwick, _Documents in Mycenaean Greek_ , and to Chadwick, _The Mycenaean
World_. Use the second edition of Ventris and Chadwick and the appendices
therein. Choose a major topic-category of interest to you (see the index and
table of contents, e.g. animals, women, bronze armor, grain, slaves, etc.),
and write a detailed essay on that topic _as it relates to the archaeology of
Mycenaean society_. You must demonstrate an analysis of the documents, and
question whether they support or do not support Chadwick's rather liberal
interpretations. Be highly critical and relate the matter to modern historical
and archaeological methodology. Does the archaeology up to the writing of the
tablets support Chadwick's interpretations? Just to follow Chadwick's chapters
and recopy them is not correct. THE KEY HERE IS TO MATCH THE WRITTEN RECORD
WITH THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL MATERIALS.

You may find W. McDonald, _Progress into the Past_ (Indiana), which is a
history of this study since Schliemann, profitable to read. (It had been out
of print, and, I believe, is now back in print [if briefly.])



_Additional reading_ :

In my office is a collection of things that you may borrow for a day and read
and copy, and then reread.

Reserve List for History 501.03: Fine Arts Library, Wexner Center.

  1. Schliemann, Heinrich, Troy, _Troja,_ _Ilios_ , _Mycenae_ , and _Tiryns_. 
  2. Evans, Arthur, _The Palace of Minos_ (many volumes). 
  3. Blegen, Carl, _The Palace of Nestor at Pylos in Western Messenia_. 
  4. Blegen, Carl, _University of Cincinnati Excavations in the Troad._ 

Reserve List for History 501.03: W. O. Thompson Library

  1. Ventris, Michael and Chadwick, John, _Documents in Mycenaean Greek_. Second edition. 
  2. Chadwick, John, _The Mycenaean World_. 



_Grades_ : Each term paper will constitute 1/7th of your final grade. The mid-
term will constitute another 1/7th. The final examination will constitute
2/7ths. The importance of the papers is stressed. They must contain excellent
introductions, body with lots of evidence (many footnotes or endnotes), and
conclusions. They must contain PROPER BIBLIOGRAPHIES AND ENDNOTES according to
the stated style and format in the Cop-Ez book.



_Reading assignments, lectures, and discussion topics_ :

Week 1. January 2, Tuesday - 5, Friday. Introduction to the Bronze Age
(Mesolithic and Neolithic).

Vermeule, _Greece in the Bronze Age_ , vii-65.

Week 2. January 8, Monday - 11, Thursday. Early and Middle Bronze Ages.

Vermeule 67-110.

_First Paper due January 11._

Week 3. January 16, Tuesday - 19, Friday Middle Bronze Age.

Week 4. January 22, Monday - 25, Thursday. Thera and Late Bronze Age.

Vermeule 111-155.

_Second Paper due January 25._

Week 5. January 29, Monday - February 1, Thursday. LBA: Crete, Greece,
Anatolia

Chadwick, _Linear B and Related Scripts_.

Chadwick, The Decipherment of Linear B.

_MID-TERM EXAMINATION ON Thursday, February 1_.

Week 6. February 5, Monday - 8, Thursday. Late Bronze Age Greece.

Vermeule 156-279.

Week 7. February 12, Monday - 15, Thursday. LBA Greece and Anatolia.

Vermeule 280-325.

_Third Paper due February 15._

Week 8. February 19, Monday - 22, Thursday. Work on last paper and prepare for
Exam.

Week 9. February 26, Monday - 29, Thursday. Linear B Documents and the
Mycenaeans.

_Fourth Paper due February 29._

Week 10. March 4, Monday - 7, Thursday. Mycenaean Wars and the End of the BA.



**Final Examination: 7:30 A.M. Thursday, March 14.**

