**_Philosophy 316_**                     **SYLLABUS _  ETHICS_** __
Eiichi Shimomisse

Fall, 2000
Office: 243-3959

Office: H&FA B-322
Dept.:  243-3328-9

Office Hours
Home: 519-0321

TTh 9:30-10:00 a.m., 1:00 p.m.-5:00p.m.& 8:15-45pm                      Fax:
519-0671

& by appointment
eshimomisseh@home.com  

www.csudh.edu/phenom_studies/       www. csudh.edu/philosophy/eshimom.htm  

                                                                       



Ethics (and Value Theory =Axiology=the philosophical Inquiry into "What Good
is") constitutes one of the three major domains of the traditional
philosophical inquiry (Besides Metaphysics and Epistemology). While The Theory
of Values is recently made more explicit in the Western World, a variety of
ethics or moral theories of human choice and conduct have been advocated and
sometimes practised from its beginning of the Western Civilization.In these
approaches, the nature of good (=values) was determined by the criterion of
the obligation and the right action, that is one of the most important and of
the most relevant to the human existence, "How should I live?" Since we have
been so accustomed to our Declaration of Independence, in which the pursuit of
happiness (together with life, liberty and equality as the natural rights) as
one of the unalienable basic human rights, we often take for granted that the
happiness can be actualized in your life and yet is the ultimately one of the
highest values, the life goal and serves, to some ethical theory, the
criterion for the morally right action.

           

While in the East, Lao Tzu and Confucius focused their attention to the
problem in the 6th-5th century B.C., in the West, Sophists and Socrates were
the first inquirers into such philosophical question of the human existence
between the 5th and 4th Century B.C. the so-called Small Socratic Schools and
Plato and Aristotle followed this. We shall study a variety of traditional and
contemporary moral theories from Eudaimonism (=the happiness--whatever it is--
as the ultimate goal of human exersion is the criterion for the right action)
including Socrates, Plato, Aristotles, Cereniacs- Epicurians, Cynics-Stoicis,
Joseph Butler's Deontology of Conscience, Hume, Bentham and Mill's
Utilitarianism, Wittgenstein's lecture, Rawls' theory of Justice. Thereby we
further intend to try to see how the so-called Naturalism and Intuitionism
(Apriori Anti-reductionism) in terms of the nature of value and of the good
have battled each other and Eudaimonism and Deontology regarding the nature of
good and the criterion of the right action have fought each other through the
history of the Western philosophy.

           

In the last half of the course, we shall pursue philosophical ethics, namely
it is the goal and the function of the philosophical ethics that we shall
critically appraise all those traditional moral theories and investigate which
philosophical position is the one that truly deserves the name of ethics,
namely providing the anwer for why we should be moral, based on the most
solid, defensible basis. We shall focus our attention on Kant's, Moore's and
Scheler's attempt on the Groundwork of ethics. Thereby we would like to
disclose that what appears a circular argument in question of "Why we should
be moral?" from the viewpoint of the linguistic analysis is due to its
blindedness to the portion of reality (the value and the valuable) which has
been hidden and neglected by the contemporary rationality and its simplistic
sight of limiting the scope of reality to that which is called "thingness." It
is our hope that we shall be able to develop a philosohical ethics based on
Max Scheler's atttempt through the new material, a priori value-theory.



Lecture notes on Ethics are available at the Web site:
http://www.csudh.edu/phenom_studies/
http://www.csudh.edu/philosophy/eshimom.htm and Univeristy Library Reserve
Shelves. __



_Requirements_



            1\. Prepare for every class meeting by reading all the assigned texts, actively participate in doing class presentations and in discussions.

            2\. Full attendance is required if you have enrolled in this class, i.e., you may be absent three class meetings altogether, provided that you excuse yourself officially by notifying the instructor either by phone or in writing prior to the class meeting/at the next class meeting.

            3\. Further in order to complete the course, you are required to take the Midterm and Final __

            4\. **Please do note the University Catalog 's statements on academic Integrity and _Plagiarism_ (cheating by copying someone else 's test or other materials than your own). **__

_ _

_Methods of Evaluation_ :

_ _

_             1\. Mid Term (20%)_ and _Final Exams (20%). Class preparations_
(and _participation) (20%). Class presentation (18%)_. Paper (22%)

            2\. At least one class presentation



_Outcome Assessment_



            1\. At least 50% of the multiple choice questions in the Mid Term and the Final Examinations

            2\. The student is capable of describing at least outlines of the five traditional eudaimonistic ethical doctrines (Cynics, Ceyreniacs, Epicurianism, Stoicism, Utilitarianism)

            3\. The student should be able to explain either what Kant's groundwork for ethics is about, the naturalistic fallacy by Moore, or Max Scheler's Non-formal Ethics.

            4\. The Final Essay must reflect the student's proper understanding of 2) and 3).



_Tentative Schedule_



Week of

1st : Introduction: Moral Philosophy/Philosophical Ethics  

2nd: Ancient Western Moral Theories: Socrates-Cynics-Ceyreniacs

3rd :Plato/Aristotle  

4th : Epicurianism  

5th : /Stoicism  

6th :  Hume/Butler  

7th : Bentham/Mill  

8th : Mill  

9th : Rawls/Wittgenstein

Mar.27-Apr.4 Spring Recess

10th: Kant and Mid Term Exam

11th: Kant __

_12 th: Kant_

13th : Moore __

14th : Moore/Scheler __

15th : Scheler's Non-Formal Ethics __

16th FINAL EXAMINATION __

_ _

_Texbooks_



Johnson, O. _Ethics_ , Holt Reihart Winston

G. E. Moore, _Principia Ethica_ , Cambridge University Press __

Kant, Immanuel, _The Groundwork for the Metaphysics of Morals_ , Harper-Torch

Scheler, _Formalism in   Ethics and Non-Formal Ethics of Values_, Northwestern
University Press (prints) __



_ _

_Selected Bibliography_



Nowell-Smith, P. H. _Ethics,_ Pelican

Prior, Arthur N., _Logic and The Basis of Ethics_ , Oxford University Press

Taylor, Paul. _Principles of Ethics_ , Dickenson Publishing Co.

Kant, Immanuel, _Critique of Practical Reason_

Adams, E. M., _Ethical Naturalism and The Modern Worldview_ , Univ of North
Carolina Press, CH

Lewis, C. I., _An Analysis of Knowledge and Valuation_ , Open Court Publishing
Co.

Nietzsche, F., _Genealogy of Morals_ , Anchor

Sidgwick, H., Methods of Ethics, Mcmillan

Aristotle, _Nicomachian Ethics_

Hartmann, Nicolai, _Ethik_

Nishida, Kitaro, _An Inquiry into the Good_

Lao Tzu, T _ao Te Ching_ (my translation)

Confucius, _Analects_

Bradley, F. H., _Ethical Studies_ , Oxford University Press, Oxford

Carritt, E. F., _The Theory of Morals_ , Oxford University Press, Oxford

Carritt, E. F., _Ethical and Political Thinking_ , Oxford University Press,
Oxford __

Hall, Everett, _What is Value?_ Humanities Press, N.Y.

Kockelmans, Joseph, _Contemporary European Ethics_ , Anchor

Prichard, H. A., _Moral Obligations,_ Oxford University Press, Oxford, England

Hare, R. M., _The Language of Morals_ , Oxford University Press, Oxford

Ross, W. D., _Foundations of Ethics_ , Oxford University Press, Oxford

Ross, W. D., _The Right and The Good_ , Oxford University Press, Oxford

Rogers, r. A. P., _Short History of Ethics_ , Macmillan, London, England

Raphael, D. Daiches, _Moral Judgement_ , George Allen & Unwin Ltd., London

Shimomisse, Eiichi, Die Phanomenologie und Das Problem der Grundlegung der
Ethik, Martinus Nijhoff, den Haag, Holland









