### SYLLABUS  
History of Greece to the end of the Peloponnesian War  
CC/HIS 354C (Fall 1999)



PLEASE NOTE: The assigned readings should be read in preparation for, that is
**BEFORE** , the lecture. To access the on-line Lecture Outlines and Study
Guides you can use either the _navigational bar_ on the front page or the
links provided below  ( **Lecture** for the Lecture Outlines, **Assignment**
for the Study Guides).

New material added to the Lecture Outlines on the WEB version will be
******written in blue** **.**

**

**Week 1 (Aug. 25-27)** |  
  
---|---  
  
Wed. |

Introduction  
  
Section |

Friday, August 27, 12:00-1:00  
"Effective Web Research" (optional but strongly recommended)  
  
|  
  
**PART I: FROM VILLAGE TO _POLIS_ (ca. 1100-600 B.C.)** |  
  
|  
  
**Week 2 (Aug. 30-Sept. 3)** |  
  
Lecture 1 |

"Setting the Stage: the Mycenaean background"  
Assignment: _Ancient Greece_ , ch. 1  
[**Study Guide 1**](sg_1.html)  
  
Lecture 2 |

"The Greek Dark Ages: ca. 1100-800 B.C."  
Assignment: _Ancient Greece_ , ch. 2, pp. 41-50  
[**Study Guide 2**](sg_2.html)  
  
Section |

"Society from Graves: Lefkandi, Euboia"  
[**Discussion Study Guide 1**](sgds_1.html) **  
**[**Discussion Outline 1**](dsoutline_1.html)  
  
**Week 3 (Sept. 6-10)** |  
  
Monday, September 6 |

NO CLASS (Labor Day)  
  
Lecture 3 |

"The Greek Dark Ages: ca. 1100-800 B.C." (con't)  
  
Section |

"Poetry as History? Society in Homer"  
[**Discussion Study Guide 2**](sgds_2.html) **  
**[**Discussion Outline 2**](dsoutline_2.html)  
  
**Week 4 (Sept. 13-17)** |  
  
Lecture 4 |

"The 8th Century: Emergence of the _Polis_ "  
Assignment: _Ancient Greece_ , ch. 2, pp. 50-81  
[**Study Guide 3**](sg_3.html)  
  
Lecture 5 |

The 8th Century (con't)  
Assignment: _Ancient Greece_ , pp. 82-90, 95-99, 103-106  
**No Study Guide**  
  
Section |

"Conflict Resolution in Homer and Hesiod"  
[**Discussion Study Guide 3**](sgds_3.html) **  
**[**Discussion Outline 3**](dsoutline_3.html)  
  
**Week 5 (Sept. 20-24)** |  
  
Lecture 6 |

"The Early Archaic Period Part I"  
Assignment: _Ancient Greece_ , pp. 106-124; Herodotus, book 3, chapters 48-53;
book 5, chapters 66-68, 92, book 6, chapters 125-131.  
[**Study Guide 4**](sg_4.html)  
  
Lecture 6 (con't) |

"The Early Archaic Period Part II"  
Assignment: _Ancient Greece_ , pp. 124-129; Fornara, nos. 11, 15, 19 (early
written laws); nos. 25, 29 (interstate agreements)  
[**Study Guide 5**](sg_5.html)  
  
Section |

Midterm I Review  
  
**Week 6 (Sept. 27-Oct. 1)** |  
  
Monday, September 27 |

Catch-up Day  
  
|  
  
**PART II: ARCHAIC ATHENS AND SPARTA AND THE PERSIAN INVASIONS (ca. 600-480
B.C.)** |  
  
|  
  
Wednesday, September 29 |

Midterm I  
  
Section |

Tradition in History  
[**Discussion Study Guide 4**](sgds_4.html)  
  
**Week 7 (Oct. 4-8)** |  
  
Lecture 7 |

"Early Sparta"  
[**Study Guide 6**](sg_6.html)  
  
Lecture 8 |

"Spartan Government"  
[**Study Guide 7**](sg_7.html)  
  
Section |

"Lycurgus and the Great Rhetra"  
[**Discussion Study Guide 5**](sgds_5.html)  
  
**Week 8 (Oct. 11-15)** |  
  
Lecture 8 (con't) |

**NOTHING NEW FOR MONDAY**  
We'll still be working on Sparta. Make sure you've done the reading from Study
Guides 6 and 7.  If you want to read ahread, begin _Ancient Greece_ , chapter
5, pp. 159-178.  
  
Lecture 9 |

"Early Athens"  
[**Study Guide 8**](sg_8.html)  
  
Section |

"History and Biography: Solon"  
[**Discussion Study Guide 6**](sgds_6.html)  
  
**Week 9 (Oct. 18-22)** |  
  
Lecture 10 |

"Solon's Reforms"  
[**Study Guide 9**](sg_9.html)  
  
Lecture 11 and 12 |

"Tyranny of Peisistratus and Cleisthenes' Reforms"  
Study Guide 9 (con't)  
  
Section |

(finishing up Athens to 500 B.C.)  
  
**Week 10 (Oct. 25-29)** |  
  
Lecture 13 |

The Persian Empire **  
**[**Study Guide 10**](sg_10.html)  
  
Lecture 14 |

Herodotus and the Ionian Revolt  
[**Study Guide 11**](sg_11.html)  
  
Section |

Marathon  
[**Discussion Study Guide 7**](sgds_7.html)  
  
**Week 11 (Nov. 1-5)** |  
  
Lecture 15 |

Xerxes's Invasion of Greece I  
[**Study Guide 12**](sg_12.html)  
  
|  
  
**Wednesday, November 3** |

**Midterm Examination II**  
  
|  
  
**PART III: THE FIFTH CENTURY B.C**. |  
  
Section |

"The Greek World in 478 BC" "Us and Them: Panhellenism"  
[**Discussion Study Guide 8**](sgds_8.html)  
  
**Week 12 (Nov. 8-12)** |  
  
Lecture 16 |

"Xerxes's Invasion of Greece II"  
**no new study guide**  
  
Lecture 17 |

"Foundation of the Delian League"  
[**Study Guide 13**](sg_13.html)  
  
Section |

"Introduction to Thucydides"  
[**Discussion Study Guide 9**](sgds_9.html)  
  
**Week 13 (Nov. 15-19)** |  
  
Lecture 18 |

"The Pentekontaetia"  
[**Study Guide 14**](sg_14.html)  
  
Lecture 19 |

"Athenian Imperialism"  
[**Study Guide 15**](sg_15.html)  
  
Section |

Critique of Democracy  
[**Discussion Study Guide 10**](sgds_10.html)  
  
**Week 14 (Nov. 22-24)** |  
  
Lecture 20 |

"Athenian Imperialism" (con't)  
  
Lecture 21 |

"Causes of the Peloponnesian War"  
[**Study Guide 16**](sg_16.html)  
  
No Sections |

Thanksgiving  
  
**Week 15 (Nov. 29-Dec. 3)** |  
  
Lecture 23 |

"The Archidamian War"  
[**Study Guide 17**](sg_17.html)  
  
Lecture 24 |

"The End of the Peloponnesian War"  
[**Study Guide 18**](sg_18.html)  
  
Section |

"The Death of Socrates"  
  
|  
  
**Wednesday, December 8, 7-10 P.M.** |

**Final Examination**  
  
|  
  
|  
  
|  
  
|  
  
|  
  
|  
  
|  
  
|  
  
|  
  
|  
  
**

