# Syllabus

Subject to change.

## Week 1: Introduction

W Jan. 23: Introduction

Go to Perseus on the Web: <http://www.perseus.tufts.edu>. Go to the Classics
collection (under Perseus Contents in the upper left hand corner). Find and
page through some of:

  * Ancient Greek texts in English: find Homer's Iliad (note two translations - compare!), Pausanias' Description of Greece, and Xenophon's Economics (which is grouped under Xenophon, Works on Socrates). Read the first few pages.
  * The vase catalog in the Art & Archaeology department. Page through the catalog; look at some pictures.
  * The Art and Archaeology browser. Click on "Other Tools and Lexica" from the vase catalog, or from the Classics collection, choose "Perseus Tools and Information" from the popup menu and then click the "Change" button. The first item is "Art and Archaeology Browser." Spend some time with the vase browser: find vases whose shape is "amphora", vases painted by the Amasis Painter.

## Week 2: Using Perseus

  * M Jan. 28: Introduction to Perseus
  * W Jan. 30: Visit to the Elvehjem Museum

Assignment: go to the first assignment on the web
(<http://www.wisc.edu/arth/ah115/assignment1/>)

Then choose one of the following vase shapes: lekythos, aryballos, krater.
Find an example of this shape in the Elvehjem collection. Then use the
techniques you learned in class and in assignment 1 to figure out what this
shape was used for. Write a short (1-2 pp.) account of the vase shape, what
kinds of information you found about it, what these vases were used for, and
how you know this. Don't rely on the information in the encyclopedia or the
vase descriptions, which are modern interpretations: look for yourself at the
vases, how they are decorated, and particularly at representations of the
vases in vase paintings. What do people in Greek vase paintings do with
lekythoi, aryballoi, kraters?

Read Martin, Ancient Greece ch. 1-4.

## Week 3: Using Perseus

  * M Feb. 4: Navigating, searching and browsing in Perseus
  * W Feb. 6: Greek language tools; secondary sources in Perseus

Assignment: Continue to explore Perseus on your own over the next couple
weeks. Become acquainted with the different Greek authors in the database.
Read the biographies in the encyclopedia of

  * Aeschylus
  * Apollodorus
  * Aristophanes
  * Aristotle
  * Demosthenes
  * Euripides
  * Lysias
  * Pausanias
  * Plato
  * Sophocles
  * Xenophon

Look at the catalogs and browser for sculpture, architecture, sites, site
plans, coins, etc. (all these will be demonstrated in class; review them
yourself).

Be familiar with the Lookup tool, the English Index

Explore the atlas, and locate:

  * Athens
  * Delphi
  * Olympia
  * Olynthus

Think about what different kinds of sources are available for your
investigations later in the seminar.

Read Martin, Ancient Greece ch. 5-7.

## Week 4: Greek Art: a ridiculously brief overview

M Feb. 11: Brief history of Greek vase painting, sculpture, etc. W Feb. 13:
continued

Assignment: see http://www.wisc.edu/arth/ah115/assignment2.html on the Web.
Each group will choose one of the following vases in the Elvehjem Museum
represented in Perseus:

  * Madison 1976.31: kylix attributed to the Penthesileia Painter
  * Madison 68.14.1: hydria attributed to the Priam Painter
  * Madison 70.2: lekythos near the Timokrates Painter
  * Madison Anonymous (Moon No. 56): neck amphora attributed to the Medea Group.

Look at the vase in the Elvehjem carefully, and read the description in
Perseus. Then use Perseus to find:

  * Other vases by the same painter. What shapes and what subjects does the painter prefer? 
  * Other vases of the same shape. When is the shape most popular, what is it used for, and how is it decorated?
  * Other vases with the same subject. When is the subject popular, and on what shapes?

Think about these questions on different levels. On the one hand, look
carefully at many vases individually, look for differences in the depiction of
similar subjects, or the decoration of the same shape. On the other hand, look
for the bigger picture: try to get an overview of patterns and trends, using
the Browser and similar tools. Try to quantify when related vases were made,
what sorts of subject matter is depicted, etc.

Write up your results in a brief essay of 2-3 pages, making references to the
other vases you have found, or tabulating broader trends to support your
arguments.

Read Martin, Ancient Greece ch. 8-10.

## Week 5-6: The Symposium

  * M Feb. 18: Introduction
  * W Feb. 20: Discussion
  * M Feb. 25: Discussion
  * W Feb. 27: Discussion

Assignment: see [assignment 3](./symposiumtopics.html) on the Web.

## Weeks 7-9: Greek Vases and Mythology

  * M Mar. 4: Introduction
  * W Mar 6: progress reports
  * M Mar. 11: progress reports
  * W Mar. 13: final reports
  * M Mar. 18: final reports
  * W Mar. 20: final reports

See full assignment [here](./myth.html).

What are the inspiration(s) of the mythological scenes on Greek vases? How do
mythological depictions differ from literary ones?

Each group will each take a different mythological story, read ancient
accounts and look at artistic representations of the myth. Learn the myth and
look for variants in literary sources. When looking at the literary sources,
think about the whole work, not just the passage cited: what is the author
saying about the myth, how does he or she use the myth to make a point in the
work?

Then find artistic representations of the myth. The browser is a useful tool
for this, as is the English Index. You can use the Perseus Lookup tool to find
alternate names and spellings of characters. Compare the representations
carefully with the literary accounts. Do not take it for granted that the
artist was thinking about the same version of the myth as the writer. Think
about the whole object as an object, not just as an illustration of a story.
Too frequently art historians use written sources to "explain" the
representations they study, as if the literary source was more primary and
important than the artistic, and philologists use art as simple
"illustrations" of written texts; both ignore the complexities of the other's
studies. Compare different tellings of the same story: how are they similar,
how do they differ? How does the medium affect how the myth is cast? What can
literature do that art can't, what can art do that literature can't?

## (Spring Break)

## Weeks 11-13: Women

We will consider the place of women in art and literature. We will look at
women on Greek vases of different sorts, on sculpture, in mythology, in comedy
and tragedy, in Athenian law and philosophy.

  * M Apr. 1: Introduction
  * W Apr. 3: no class
  * M Apr. 8: progress reports
  * W Apr. 10: progress reports
  * M Apr. 15: final reports
  * W Apr 17: final reports
  * M Apr. 22: final reports

## Week 13-15: Warfare (1)

  * W Apr. 24: Introduction
  * M Apr. 29: progress reports
  * W May 1: final reports
  * M May 6: final reports
  * W May 8: final reports

Warfare was endemic in the Greek world. We will consider the place of war and
of the warrior in Greek thought; what a Greek battle was actually like, and
how it was depicted in art and literature.

