#  **THE CLASSICAL AGE OF GREECE**

##  **HUMANITIES 1114:** Fall 2002



  
10:10-11:00 MWF; (CRN 92988) McBryde 332

**Dr. Terry L. Papillon** (Classics)

Office: Major Williams 304 Phone: 231-8319

E-Mail: [Terry.Papillon@vt.edu](mailto: Terry.Papillon@vt.edu)

Office Hours: 8-9, 1:30-2:30 MWF and by appointment

  
    


**Programs in the Humanities** is one part of the **Center for
Interdisciplinary Studies** (CIS). For more information on CIS or the
Humanities Program, see the CIS home page: <http://www.cis.vt.edu/>

**COURSE DESCRIPTION** :

The course is intended to serve as an interdisciplinary and multimedia
introduction to Greek Culture and its importance to the Western heritage. It
will use a variety of artifacts from the ancient Greeks as a basis for
exploring the ways in which the Greeks understood themselves and the world
around them. As such, they introduce to us ways we still use to ask and answer
questions.

The students will spend a good deal of time reading primary (ancient)
materials, looking at images, and thinking about the implications of them for
the Greeks themselves and for each individual student herself or himself. The
outcome of the course will be a deeper understanding (and appreciation?) of
this source of Western civilization and its legacy to modern society as well
as a different outlook on the world by each student.  
    


**COURSE DESCRIPTION?**

**"A culture is not a flow, nor even a confluence; the form of its existence
is struggle, or at least debate -- it is nothing if not a dialectic."**

**Lionel Trilling   "Reading in America"**

  


Struggle, debate, dialectic. These are the things which made Greece the
society that is at the foundation of so many Western ideas and ideals. Yet
these three things are what make a flow as well. As we shall see, "The
Classical Age of Greece" is really the result of a flow of peoples and their
ideas which engaged in struggle, debate and dialectic. In order to understand
what the idea of "The Classical" means for our study, we must be aware of its
context: what is before it, around it, and after it. Therefore, we shall spend
time in our course not only on "The Classical Age of Greece," (479-323 B.C.),
but also what is before it in Greece, what is around it in other cultures, and
what follows it both in Greece and elsewhere.

Struggle, debate, dialectic. We will see the Greeks struggle in various ways
with those around them (the Near East, the Trojans, the Persians, the Romans)
and with themselves (in the great civil war called the Peloponnesian Wars, in
the Greek Enlightenment, and the questions of foreign policy). We will see
them engage in debate as they forge a radical democracy in the fifth century
out of former tyrannies. And we will see them take up dialectic in the fourth
century as they seek to find out what is most important about being human.

Yet the dialectic of the fourth century is merely one high point in the
ongoing attempt of the Greeks to decide what it means to be human. This
question haunts and drives them throughout their history. We will see them
asking this question -- and answering it in different and incomplete ways --
during the Bronze, Archaic, and Classical periods of Greek history; in the
visionary images of epic, lyric, and dramatic poetry; in the concrete, yet
abstract, images of sculpture, painting, and architecture; and in the voices
of history, oratory, and philosophy. This question -- what does it mean to be
a human being in relation to all that is around -- remained in the forefront
of their thought. It should remain in the front of our minds too as we follow
our path through those artifacts which represent different aspects of the
question and different attempts at the answer. For it is, after all, a very
modern question and one which, to me personally, is very intriguing and very,
very important.  
    


**COURSE GOALS** : -To introduce students to the culture of Classical Greece
through poetry, art, archaeology, history, oratory, and philosophy

-To consider the contributions of the culture to modern Western thought

-To develop skills in reading comprehension through analysis of a variety of genres of written texts

-To develop skills in writing through informal writing, reading, preparation of two papers, and the writing of in-class examinations (essay, in part)

-To contemplate some issues such as life, death, love, devotion, god, gods, humanity, beauty, honesty, responsibility, freedom, public, private

-To consider the thoughts and images of the ancient Greeks and whether they will have any effect on how each student organizes her or his life **BEHAVIORAL ORGANIZATION** : -Students will read, view, and contemplate the dayis assignments. You should have the dayis material in clear view in your mind and be able to ask intelligent questions and make intelligent comments about it.

-The course will be a combination of lecture and discussion. You should show your active participation in the course not only through speaking up, but through thoughtful listening to your comrades (and instructor) as well.

-The course will be evaluated on the basis of daily work and quizzes, two papers (6-8 pages each), a midterm exam, and a cumulative final exam. Specifically:   
  Daily work & quizzes 10%

Midterm Examination (10/18) 20%

2 Papers (9/27; 11/4) 20% each

Final examination1 (12/13, 1:05-3:05) 30%  
  -Grades for late papers will be lowered one grade per class period late. Missed examinations will not be made up unless prior approval is given or a doctoris written medical explanation is provided. **COURSE DETAILS** : -The course is heavily dependent on class time. I expect you to attend every class. My comments in class will not be very helpful if you have not read the assignment, so make every effort to have assignments completed for the given class period.

-If you get behind or get confused, make sure to see me as soon as possible. So much of the material builds on prior information that it is crucial to solve problems right away. Either come to my office or grab me after class.

-If there is any physical condition which inhibits or alters your participation in the course, please inform me after the first class meeting so that you and I can make plans for solving any difficulties.

-I always encourage students to meet in informal study and discussion groups to help make the material more clear and more enjoyable.

-When it comes to written work, however, (papers, exams) you should do your own work. Never represent the ideas of others as your own (this is true in oral work as well). Please read the section in the _Undergraduate Catalog_ on the Honor System. I take this issue very seriously.

-The instructor reserves the right to adjust the syllabus for pedagogical reasons if it is deemed necessary.   
    **REQUIRED TEXTS** :   


> Homer, _The Iliad_ , tr. M. Hammond. Penguin Books, 1987.

>

> Aeschylus, _The Oresteia_ , tr. R. Fagles. Penguin Classics, 1977.

>

> Sophocles, _The Three Theban Plays_ , tr. R. Fagles. Penguin Classics, 1982.

>

> Euripides, _Ten Plays_ , tr. P. Roche. Signet Classics, 1998.

>

> Aristophanes, _Lysistrata and Other Plays_ , tr. A.H. Sommerstein. Penguin
Classics, 1973.

>

> Thucydides, _On Justice, Power, and Human Nature: Selections from The
History of the Peloponnesian War_ , tr. P. Woodruff. Hackett Publishing, 1993.

>

> Plato, _The Last Days of Socrates_ , tr. H. Tredennick. Penguin Classics,
1954.  
>  

**ONLINE RESOURCES:** (with syllabus abbreviations) [P]
[Perseus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/perscoll?collection=Perseus:collection:Greco-
Roman&lookup=Perseus+catalog): An Evolving Digital Library on Ancient Greece
on the WWW.

[O] _[Overview of Archaic and Classical Greek
History](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/ptext?doc=Perseus:text:1999.04.0009)_ , by T.R. Martin in the _Perseus_
web site.

[CSH] Classical Studies Homepage:
[www.cis.vt.edu/classicalstudies/classicshome.html](http://www.cis.vt.edu/classicalstudies/classicshome.html)
(mirror site)
[www.fll.vt.edu/classics/classicshome.html](http://www.fll.vt.edu/classics/classicshome.html)

  
[H] Humanities 1114 (Papillon) homepage:
[www.cis.vt.edu/classicalstudies/Hum1114.html](http://www.cis.vt.edu/classicalstudies/Hum1114.html)
(mirror site)
[www.fll.vt.edu/classics/Hum1114.html](http://www.fll.vt.edu/classics/Hum1114.html)
Click here for the **[Daily Syllabus](Hum1114D.html)**  


