#  ASTRONOMY 348: INTRODUCTION TO COSMOLOGY

## SPRING 2002

**Instructor:** John Hawley, 219 Astronomy Building. Office Hours 2-3:30
Monday and Tuesday, or by appointment. Office Phone number 924-4901. E-mail
address: [jh8h@virginia.edu](mailto:jh8h@virginia.edu)

**Astro Dept Home Page:** [
http://www.astro.virginia.edu](http://www.astro.virginia.edu)

**Astro 348 Home Page:** [
http://www.astro.virginia.edu/class/hawley/astr348/](http://www.astro.virginia.edu/class/hawley/astr348/)

**Text:** _Foundations of Modern Cosmology_ , by J. Hawley and K. Holcomb
(Oxford University Press); [ Textbook Home page:
http://www.astro.virginia.edu/~jh8h/Foundations/
](http://www.astro.virginia.edu/~jh8h/Foundations/)

**About this course:**

This is a descriptive course covering some of the most exotic aspects of
modern physics and astronomy: special and general relativity, black holes, the
nature of space and time, the big bang. Although these subjects are highly
technical and mathematical, our goal will be to understand them in a
_qualitative_ way.

We will strive to keep what math there is as simple as possible, i.e., simple
algebra, although we will show some calculus for those familiar with it. You
will need to be able to understand some mathematical ideas in a general way,
e.g., graphs, simple equations, how things change when some parameter is
changed, etc. You will need to be able to judge scales of things, and think
about things far removed from the scales of everyday life. You will also need
to be able to read and understand graphs, and understand what formulae and
equations mean. But you will not have to derive any equations. You will not be
responsible for memorizing all of the equations in the text. You will have to
understand what they mean in a qualitative way, and be able to remember and
use some of the simpler ones. The technical details will be explained and
discussed in class. You will be told which specific equations your should
learn.

The main text for this course has been developed and written by your
instructor. The lectures will follow the text closely. When possible you
should read the relevant chapter ahead of the associated lecture. I welcome
comments, suggestions, and questions about the text. Questions, comments, and
discussion are welcomed during class, in person, or via e-mail.

**Exams:** There will be two midterms and a final exam. The final exam is
scheduled for May 10, 9-12am in Clark 140. The schedule for the final exam is
determined by college rules and cannot be changed. The final will be
comprehensive.

The two midterms are scheduled for March 5 and April 16. The format of the
exams will be primarily multiple choice and short answer. The subject matter
in this course is somewhat challenging. This is reflected in the exams. The
questions themselves may not be complicated, but you have to understand what
is going on; you can't rely on memorization. It is essential that you keep up
with the reading, lectures and problem sets. Take advantage of your
opportunities to ask questions and test your knowledge prior to the exam. Each
chapter of the text includes a list of key terms to help guide your study, as
well as set of review questions. Some of the review questions will appear on
the problem sheets.

YOU MUST TAKE THE EXAM AT THE SCHEDULED TIME. Absences, Make up exams, etc.
must be cleared _before_ the exam time. Make up exams are available only at
the discretion of the instructor. Requests for make ups should be made in
person or by the phone. E-mail is not recommended because you may not get an
answer; I generally don't grant excuses via email. Each of the exams will be
closed book. Calculators are allowed, but only for doing math. You may not
program information into a calculator or computer and use it during the exam.

**Other Assignments:** You are required to do three of the following
assignments:

  1. Problem sheet on first third of class (Due Feb. 26). 
  2. Problem sheet on second third of class (Due April 9). 
  3. Problem sheet on third third of class (Due April 30). 
  4. Day lab on the Palomar Sky Survey. 
  5. Day lab on Cepheids and the Distance Scale. 
  6. Computer lab on the Hubble Constant. 
  7. Night Telescope Observing Lab (Due April 9). 

The Problem sheet assignments are due on these dates in the semester: Feb. 26,
April 9, and April 30. You are required to do three of the possible
assignments, but not necessarily the Problem sheets. The easiest way to
complete your requirement is to do the three problem sheets as scheduled (an
excellent idea in any case since they are supposed to prepare you for the
exams); that would take care of your responsibilities. The problem sheets are
available on the web, and hardcopies will be available for those who want
them. You may do any of the other assignments in lieu of a problem set, but
ONE ASSIGNMENT is REQUIRED at each of the 3 deadlines throughout the semester.
If you like, you may do ONE additional assignment for EXTRA CREDIT. This may
be turned in any time throughout the semester up until the last day of class.
Deadlines for homeworks will be strictly enforced. Plan ahead. There will be
NO EXCEPTIONS to the deadline rules! Note special information about the day
labs, computer lab, and telescope lab, given below.

**Grading:** The midterms are worth 200 points and the final 250 points. The
other assignments are worth 40 points each. So if you did the exams and the
three assignments required you would have a total of 770 points. If you do an
extra credit assignment I simply add those points on to your total. If you
achieve 90 percent or above of the 770 total points, you will get an A. Ninety
to eighty percent is a B, etc. This is the minimum guaranteed scale; if
necessary it may be curved down (that is if the tests were too hard or
something). In past years the curve has been rather small because most
students in the class have done pretty well. The minimums simply guarantee
that all students who do well will receive an appropriate high grade.

Please note: this is a 300 level course. I expect students to gain a minimal
level of understanding of the material to receive credit for the course. You
need to earn at least 50 percent of the points in the course to pass. You may
take this course CR/NCR, but must achieve the equivalent of a C- or better to
receive credit. If you wish, you may audit this course. If you wish to audit
the course, let me know. As per university regulations decisions regarding
grade options must be made by the appropriate date on the university schedule.

**Honor Code Policy** : COLLABORATION ON ALL WRITTEN ASSIGNMENTS IS FORBIDDEN.
YOUR WRITTEN WORK MUST REPRESENT A COMPLETELY INDEPENDENT EFFORT ON YOUR PART.
YOUR PLEDGE WILL BE REQUIRED TO INDICATE COMPLIANCE WITH ALL REQUIREMENTS. You
can and should discuss the reading, lectures, concepts, etc. with your fellow
students, but NOT the answers to the questions on the written assignments. The
idea is that these problem sets are of no benefit unless you think them
through for yourself. Specific questions about the assignments should be
directed to your instructor, or to the teaching assistants. When you ask your
instructor or a TA we can make certain you do understand the concept involved.
Your work on an exam must be entirely your own.

**Additional Help:** In addition to visiting with your instructor, during
office hours or by appointment, please feel free to send queries via e-mail.
In addition, there are astronomy teaching assistants available for
consultation in the Astronomy Laboratory, Room 267 Astronomy Bldg., [ 530
McCormick Road](http://www.astro.virginia.edu/class/530McC.html). The TA
office hour schedule is 3:30 to 6:30 PM Tuesday and Wednesday, and 10:00 AM to
1:00 PM Monday, Thursday and Friday. See the [ TA Schedule
Page](http://www.astro.virginia.edu/class/ta_schedule.html) for further
information.

**Day Labs:** The Day Lab is run by teaching assistants in the astronomy
department. To do a lab, go to the Astronomy Laboratory, Room 267 of 530
McCormick Road during the TA hours as described above. All the needed
materials are available here. The labs are

  1. _Cepheid Variables and the Cosmic Distance Scale._ Explore a basic method for finding distances to galaxies. Requires the use of logarithms. 
  2. _Palomar Sky Survey._ You will study prints of the sky to learn about galaxies, their descriptions and classifications. 
  3. _Hubble Redshift Distance Relation._ This is a computer lab, run on a PC. A working knowledge of Windows is the only computer skill needed. You will gather and analyze galaxy spectra and images to determine the rate of expansion of the universe. A Signal to Noise of at least 10 is generally required for reasonable detection. Requires understanding the Hubble parameter, calculations of velocities, distances, etc. 

**Night Lab:** It is sometimes unfortunate that one can take an Astronomy
course and never even look up into the sky. To correct this there is the
121/124 TELESCOPE OBSERVING LAB. Students who want to do the telescope lab
should meet the TA in the parking lot along side of 530 McCormick Road on a
Monday or Thursday night at 9 PM. The sky must be clear fo the lab to be held.
The first lab meeting is January 28. The last evening to do this lab for ASTR
348 is **April 8th**. When you meet at the parking lot, the TA will lead
students to the McCormick Observatory. You may bring a car if you have one.
During the lab you will observe and sketch three objects, one each throught
the 6 and 10 inch telescopes, and one through the main 26 inch telescope. Be
sure to get the telescope operator's signature for each drawing; completed lab
sheets are turned into the TA for grading. NOTE: IF YOU HAVE TAKEN ASTR 130,
ASTR 313, HAVE BEEN A ASTRO TA, ARE AN ASTRO MAJOR, OR HAVE DONE THIS LAB
BEFORE, YOU WILL NOT GET CREDIT FOR THIS LAB AND YOU SHOULD DO ANOTHER
ASSIGNMENT. THIS LAB IS INTENDED FOR STUDENTS WITHOUT PRIOR ASTRONOMY
OBSERVING EXPERIENCE.

**Observatory Open Houses:** For those interested, the department of Astronomy
has an open house every first and third Friday night every month at the
McCormick Observatory. Weather permitting, visitor's can view the planets and
other objects through the 26 inch McCormick telescope. The observatory is open
from 7-9 PM through March, and 9-11 PM in April and May. In addition, there is
one open house in the spring at the University's Fan Mountain Observatory
south of Charlottesville. Admission tickets are required for the Fan Mountain
open house and can be obtained free of charge. More information is available
from the astronomy department web site.

* * *

_Last modified January 16, 2002 by[jh8h](mailto:jh8h@virginia.edu) _  
[ http://www.astro.virginia.edu/class/hawley/astr348](/class/hawley/astr348)  

