****

**The New one will be moved over shortly**  

  

**NOTE:  ** IF ANY MEMBER OF THE CLASS FEELS THAT HE/SHE HAS A DISABILITY AND
NEEDS SPECIAL ACCOMMODATIONS, PLEASE ADVISE THE INSTRUCTOR OF SUCH DISABILITY
AT THE FIRST CLASS ATTENDED.

    
( **Sum 99) Syllabus**  
**  PSYC 5283 (Career Guidance & Counseling)**  
**  Northeastern State University, Tahlequah, OK 74464**  
**  Department of Psychology and Counseling**

 Dr. Carolyn S. Hawley  
Office: 215 Haskell Hall  
Phone: 918 456-5511, Ext. 3002  
E-Mail: hawley@cherokee.nsuok.edu  
        chawley@intellex.com   
    
  __

TEXT:  Isaacson, L.E. and Brown, D. (1997) _Career Information, Career
Counseling, and Career Development_ 6 ed.  Needham Heights, MA 02194:  Allyn
and Bacon

Most counselors will do some career guidance and counseling because of the
importance of work to individuals.   There will be many challenges to
counselors in this area:  corporate mergers, down-sizing, rapidly changing
technology, a world employment market, and changing demographics of the work
force, among other variables.   Clients range across the age span from
teenagers seeking part-time and summer employment to retired workers wanting
to reenter the labor market.   Clients vary in gender, gender preference,
ethnic membership, and cultural heritage.   Career, employment, and lifestyle
are obvious issues with everyone, including individuals with disabilities.
Career exploration, career choice, career decision making, job placement, job-
seeking skills, job-keeping skills, and self-understanding are important
constructs to the career counselor.   It is important that  counselors know
about and have some mastery of the techniques and methods that will be
effective with clients across the life span.

So, with all this in mind, the purpose of this course is to help counseling
students understand the skills, abilities, and knowledge needed to work with
all kinds of clients across the lifespan.    In order to achieve this purpose,
students must know the relationship among theory, research, and practice when
working with the different types of clients.  Counselors must be alert to
career information sources and the most efficient and effective ways of
guiding individuals with different types of learning styles to develop a good
knowledge base for decision making.

According to the NSU Graduate Catalog this course is described as: "A survey
of theories and the development of occupational information and its use in
industry, government, education, and community agencies."  It is designed to
equip the student  with competencies necessary to assist others  in making
decisions about educational and career alternatives. The emphasis is on
planning for careers, identification, selection, and use of educational and
career guidance resources.

    
Choose a job you love, and you will never have to work a day in your life.
-Confucius  

* * *

**Course Objectives:**

Upon successful completion of the course, students are expected to:

1\. demonstrate knowledge of similarities and differences of major career and
lifestyle development theories and career and educational decision making
theories.  
2\. organize guidance activities related to career development.  
3\. identify decision-making processes and how these processes can be used
with individuals in various aspects of career development.  
4\. locate and evaluate educational and career materials.  
5\. identify appropriate materials to be used in educational and career
development.  
6\. interpret student appraisal data relevant to career development and
decision making.  
7\. identify appropriate procedures to assist students in developing
employability skills.  
8\. assist students in exploring career and educational options.  
9\. provide specific information about educational and vocational training
opportunities.  
10\. have knowledge of career and educational placement, follow-up and
evaluation procedures.  
11\. study changing roles of women and men as related to career counseling and
development.  
12\. explore the interrelationships among work, family and leisure.  
13\. have knowledge of the methods, materials, and counseling techniques
appropriate to work with culturally different individuals and groups.

EVALUATION OF ACHIEVEMENT:

The final numerical grade will be converted to a letter grade using the
following relationships:  
    
     90 - 100  = A   
     80  \- 89  = B   
     70 -  89  = C   
     60 -  79  = D   
       BELOW 60  = F 

     Grades in this class are based on average percentages in 3 categories.  Each of the grade categories is weighted separately.  The entries in each category are averaged.  A percentage grade is determined by combining the category averages using the appropriate weights.   The categories and weights used are: 

Assignments are weighted 45% of your overall grade  
Examinations are weighted 45% of your overall grade  
Attendance/Participation weighted 10% of your overall grade

    
Students will receive computer status sheets which will provide the necessary
feedback concerning performance in the class.  
    
What's it all about?????

Quizzes, Attendance/Participation, Interview workers, Chapter Presentations,
Autobiography, Web discovery -- these are all things you will do this
semester. A brief description of some of these assignments follows.  Any other
assignments will be announced as we go along.

Be sure to get phone numbers of people in your group.

    
There will likely be a quiz at the beginning of each class period on the
assigned reading for the day.   The tests will be true-false and/or multiple
choice.  

* * *

  
Please turn your cell phones off or put them on vibration when you enter the
class.    If there is an urgent situation pending, then talk to me.

* * *

Career Autobiography

REPORT THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IN OUTLINE FORM:

1\. Personal Data:  
  Age  
  Order of birth  
  Size of family  
  Education and occupation of mother  
  Education and occupation of father  
  Education and occupation of siblings  
     General comments about education and occupation of close relatives   
  Other pertinent information

2\. Educational Data:  
  Years completed -- why?  
  Program of study -- why selected?  
  Describe any other influences contributing to educational  
   decisions  

* * *

3\. Occupational Data:  
  Chronology of jobs  
  How were jobs found  
  Why were jobs selected?  
  Reactions to each job  
  Perceptions of work behavior of others on the job  
  Perceptions of work behavior of self on the job  
  Work behavior most valued  
  How do you feel about your current career situation?  
  What are your current career plans?

Present the above information in outline form.  Then, using this information,
discuss the theory (or theories) of career development that seems to be
reflected in your various events in your life and provide evidence which
supports your interpretation.

* * *

  
    
Student Presentations on your chosen chapter --

Approximately 50 minutes to do this project.

1\. Develop a typed, double spaced outline of topic-- (1 -2 pages).  \-- You
will need enough copies of your outline for each member of the class -  You
will need to  make arrangements to copy them yourself.

2\. Create games/activities to demonstrate the material in your unit.
Remember that students will already have read the material and will be
familiar with it.  Your job is to demonstrate it.  Do not READ  to them FROM
THE BOOK, in fact,  DO NOT READ AT ALL to the students.  CREATE AN
EXPERIENTIAL ACTIVITY TO DEMONSTRATE THE MATERIAL.   Video clips are OK as
long as your entire presentation is not using this mode.

    
3.  You must make every group member accountable for some part   
    of the project.  I will be looking for equal participation from each member. 

  

* * *

  
The Tentative Outline

There will be some variance in this outline due to speaker availability and
such.   So stay on your toes, be prepared,   and hang on.

Week 1  
1\. Introductions, Chapter 1  
  Paridigms  
  Do Autobiography (See format)

2.  Chapter 2, Theories   
 Quiz,   Autobiography will be applied to theories

Week 2  
3.  Chapter 3,  Factors influencing Workers and Their careers, Quiz 

4.  Chapter 4,   Occupational Structure, 

 Exam over Chapter 1, 2, 3, and 4

Week 3  
5.  Chapter 5 and 6,   The Dictionary of Occupational Titles and Related   
 Systems  
 Job Analysis  
 Web Assignment -  


6.  Chapter 7 and 8, Finding and organizing Career Information   
   and Computer Assisted Career Guidance Systems.  
    
 Exam over Chapters 5,6, 7, 8  


    
Week 4  
 Student Presentation on Chapter 9 Elementary and Middle Schools  
 Quiz  
 Student Presentation on Chapter 10, Career Development in the High  
    School   
 Quiz

Week 5  
 Student Presentation of Chapter 11, 4 year colleges, Community  
   Colleges, and Vocational-Technical Schools.

 Student Presentation of Chapter 12, Career Development Needs  
  of Special Groups.

  Exam over Chapters 9, 10, 11, 12

Week 6  
 Student Presentation of Chapter 13, Testing and Assessment in Career  
   Development  
 Quiz

 Chapter 14, Career Counseling, Dr. Blackburn  
 Quiz  


Week 7  
 Student Presentation of Chapter 15, Preparing for Work

 Student Presentation of Chapter 16, Job Placement, Outplacement,  
   and the Job Search Process.

Exam over Chapter 13, 14, 15, 16

Week 8  
 Chapter 17, 18, 19, Career Development in Business and Industry,  
   Career Counselors in Private Practice, and Trends and Issues.  
    
   Exam over Chapter 17, 18, 19  
    
    
    
    


