## SYLLABUS BIB 346.01

* * *

**

    
    
    SYLLABUS
    
    BIB 346 Contem. Rel. Doc.      Instructor: Bruce Terry
    Section: 01  Room: NC 63       Office: Stotts (NC), Room 20A
    Day/Time: TTh 2:30-3:50pm      Telephone: 304/485-7384 ext. 153
    Office Hours: MW 10-11am; 2-4pm; TTh 1-2:30pm; F 2-3pm
    E-mail:[rbterry@ovc.edu](mailto:rbterry@ovc.edu)
    

**

### Texts:

  * A Study Bible (such as the _Harper's Study Bible_ or the _NIV Study Bible_ ; please limit yourself to the Revised Standard, the New American Standard, the New International, or the New Revised Standard versions, but the instructor will be using the Revised Standard Version)  

  * _Redigging the Wells_ by Monroe Hawley 
  * _Life in the Son_ by Robert Shank 
  * _Counterfeit Miracles_ by Benjamin Warfield 
  * _A Cappella Music_ by Everett Ferguson 
  * _Handbook of Denominations_ by Mead 
  * Turabian, _A Manual for Writers of Term Papers, Theses, and Dissertations_ (6th ed.)  

  * Harvey, _Writing with Sources_ 

### Course Description

This course will focus on biblical teaching and departures from those
teachings throughout the course of history in the Christian Age. A minor theme
will be the association of specific doctrines with specific denominations. An
emphasis will be placed on persuading those who hold non-biblical doctrines of
the truth of the biblical teaching.

### Course Objectives

  1. To acquaint the student with the biblical teachings of the early church as found primarily in the New Testament. 
  2. To develop an understanding of how and why departures from these teachings occurred in the course of history. 
  3. To encourage the development of persuasive skills that will enable the student to teach and write about these doctrines in a positive manner. 
  4. To help the student realize the importance of following Jesus, thus providing a faith building experience for the student. 

### Attendance and Tardies

Attendance in class is mandatory; it will be part of the basis for the grade
given. If you cannot attend for good reason, either notify me beforehand or as
soon as possible afterward. This applies even if you have an excused absence.
You will be expected to do all work of any classes missed, except for pop
quizzes and daily homework. If you do not intend to attend regularly, kindly
withdraw from the class now.

Do NOT miss class simply because you do not have an assignment finished. Do
NOT miss class if you can possibly come; save any absences for sickness or
death in the family. If you have an extended illness, please contact me to let
me know.

Kindly try to be a class on time. If you are consistently tardy for no good
reason, I reserve the right to count three tardies as an absence.

If you have to leave early, please inform me before class. Do not schedule
extra work, doctor's appointments, etc. during class time if at all possible.
If you are too frequent in leaving early, I reserve the right to count early
departures as a partial absence, adversely affecting your grade.

Absences may be excused if you bring me documentation that you were ill,
involved in an accident, on school business, or there was a death in the
immediate family. More than three hours of unexcused absences will result in
your being dropped from the course. You may pay a fine and petition to be
reinstated. Additional unexcused absences will result in your being dropped
without future reinstatement. No credit will be given for a course in which
absences, both excused and unexcused, total more than 25% of the hours of the
course (i.e., as many as 8 class periods).

### Office Hours

I will be in my office ten hours during the week as outlined above. If you
have class conflicts with my office hours, you can schedule another time with
me. Appointments during office hours will be given precedence over drop-ins,
but if you need to see me about something and don't have an appointment, come
on up to my office and I will try to squeeze you in. If you need help, please
use my office hours. You may also see me both before and after class as time
permits. I will be available for extended conferences after class hours if it
does not interfere with another class or chapel. No appointment will usually
be necessary to see me at this time. If I am not in my office at office hours
after a class, check my last classroom to see if a student has detained me
there.

### Grades

Your grade for the class will be based on four major exams (including a
comprehensive final exam), a five-page persuasive paper on a non-biblical
teaching held by some in Christendom, three two-page book reports on the three
textbooks, ten one-half page summaries of the beliefs and practices of ten
denominations of your choosing, and attendance and participation in class.
Exam questions can come from the lectures or assigned readings from either the
textbook or the New Testament. The final exam will cover material from the
whole course.

The papers should be typed. The number of pages listed for the typed papers
refer to full pages, not counting the cover sheet (required) and bibliography
(also required for the persuasive paper with at least three entries, most of
which are from books). One page is defined as **27 double-spaced typewritten
lines** (counting the title, but not your name or page numbers) with 1"
margins. The typed papers should be written using the Turabian style guide.

Class will be excused for students attending the World Missions Workshop.
Students will be expected to attend at least a one hour class for each hour
missed and turn in a one-page report on the class attended. The reports will
count as attendance grades.

Ten points will be given for attendance. One point will be deducted for each
class missed, including those missed for illness. The only exception to this
will be those who miss on official school business and have an official notice
to this effect. Two grace days will be given to allow for absences due to
illness and excused absences for official school business. Note well: Grace
days will be applied first to excused absences.

Additional readings/quizzes/essays/maps may be assigned.

The final grade will be based on your work in the following way:

    
    
              Attendance                                        10%
              Book Reports                                      12%
              Summaries                                         10%
              Major Paper                                       15%
              Major Tests                                       36%
              Final Exam                                        17%
    

Extra credit in these areas will not be allowed to exceed these percentages.
Extra credit in the course will be given for up to two one-page reports on the
Inman Forum and one extra page on the Hawley book report on the pages not
assigned in class. Your final grade will be A, B, C, D, or F. An A will be
given for an average of 100-90, a B for 89-80, a C for 79-70, a D for 69-60,
and an F for any average below 60.

All work is expected to be turned in on time. If for some reason you cannot
make the due date, please ask my permission to turn the work in late. Late
homework is accepted for only half credit, since the answers will often be
given in class. The typed papers turned in late will dock the paper grade by
one-half letter (5%) per class period late.

Students who are absent on exam days with good reason may schedule a make-up
exam within the next week. You must ask to take a make-up exam.

Students who score less than a 70 on a major exam may petition to retake the
exam within a week after grades are returned on it. The highest grade on any
retake exam will be 70. Once again, you must ask to retake an exam. There will
be no retakes on the final exam. Study hard for it.

### Plagiarism

Plagiarism is the presentation of another person's work as your own, whether
you mean to or not. Copying or paraphrasing passages from another writer's
work without acknowledging that you've done so is plagiarism. Translating
passages from another writer's work in another language without acknowledging
that you've done so is plagiarism. Copying another writer's work without
putting the material in quotation marks is plagiarism, even if credit is
given. Allowing another writer to write any part of your essay is plagiarism.

**Plagiarism is a serious crime. The maximum penalty at OVC is expulsion from
the college.**

Plagiarism is easy to avoid. Simply acknowledge the source of any words,
phrases, or ideas that you use. If you're not sure how to quote or paraphrase
a source or if you need help with the format of endnotes or bibliographies,
check with me. While you can (and in fact should) seek the help and advice of
friends, classmates, and tutors, be sure that your written work is completely
your own.

### Compliance with Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)

If you have a diagnosed disability and need special accommodations, please
notify the Office of the Vice President for Academic Affairs before or
immediately after your first scheduled class meeting. After your disability
has been verified, your instructor will work with you and the Office of the
Vice President for Academic Affairs to insure that you have a fair opportunity
to perform in the course.

    
    
    **MAJOR EXAM DATES:**   Exam 1 -- Thursday, September 14, 2000
                        Exam 2 -- Thursday, October 12, 2000
                        Exam 3 -- Thursday, November 9, 2000
                        Final Exam -- Tuesday, December 12, 2000
                                       3:00 p.m. - 4:50 p.m.
    

###  Course Plan

    
    
    **WEEK ONE:**
     8/24/00 -- Introduction to the Course
                Use of the Old Testament Laws
    
    **WEEK TWO:**
                homework: read Hawley, chaps. 1-3 (extra credit)
     8/29/00 -- Use of the Old Testament Laws
                homework: read Hawley, chaps. 4-6 (extra credit)
     8/31/00 -- The Nature of God
    
    **WEEK THREE:**
                homework: read Hawley, chaps. 7-8
     9/ 5/00 -- Denominationalism
                homework: read Hawley, chaps. 9-10
     9/ 7/00 -- Denominationalism
    
    **WEEK FOUR:**
                homework: read Hawley, chaps. 11-12
     9/12/00 -- Denominationalism
                homework: study for exam
     9/14/00 -- **Major Exam**
    
    **WEEK FIVE:**
                homework: as assigned in class
     9/19/00 -- Church Government
                homework: write **2-page book report on Hawley**
                            (3-pages for extra credit)
     9/21/00 -- Saints, Images, Mother of God
    
    **WEEK SIX:**
                homework: as assigned in class
     9/26/00 -- Sacraments
                homework: as assigned in class
     9/28/00 -- Baptism, Confirmation
    
    **WEEK SEVEN:**
                homework: read Shank, chaps. 1-8
    10/ 3/00 -- Grace  & Works
                homework: read Shank, chaps. 9-12
    10/ 5/00 -- Grace & Works
    Inman Forum
    
    **WEEK EIGHT:**
                homework: read Shank, chaps. 13-19
    10/10/00 -- TULIP/Perseverance of the Saints
                homework: study for test
    10/12/00 -- **Major Exam**
    
    **WEEK NINE:**
                homework: as assigned in class
    10/17/00 -- Pre-millenialism/Dispensationalism
                homework: read Terry's article on Synoptic Apocalypse
                          write **2-page book report on Shank**
    10/19/00 -- Synoptic Apocalypse
    World Mission Workshop
    Huffard Forum
    
    **WEEK TEN:**
                homework: read Terry's article on Luke 17  & A.D. 70
    10/24/00 -- Synoptic Apocalypse
                homework: as assigned in class
    10/26/00 -- Adventism
    
    **WEEK ELEVEN:**
                homework: read Warfield, chap. 1-2
                          write **10 one-half-page summaries of various
                            denominations**
    10/31/00 -- The Holy Spirit
                homework: read Warfield, chap. 3
    11/ 2/00 -- Miracles
    
    **WEEK TWELVE:**
                homework: read Warfield, chap. 4-5
    11/ 7/00 -- Tongue-Speaking/Pentecostalism
                homework: study for test
    11/ 9/00 -- **Major Exam**
    Last Day to Drop a Class with a "W"--Stick with it to the end!
    
    **WEEK THIRTEEN:**
                homework: read Warfield, chap. 6
    11/14/00 -- Christian Science/Mormonism
                homework: write **2-page book report on Warfield**
    11/16/00 -- Jehovah's Witnesses
    
    THANKSGIVING BREAK
    
    **WEEK FOURTEEN:**
                homework: read Ferguson
    11/28/00 -- Instrumental Music
                homework: write **5-page persuasive paper**
    11/30/00 -- Role of Women
    
    **WEEK FIFTEEN:**
                homework: as assigned in class
    12/ 5/00 -- Role of Women
                homework: as assigned in class
    12/ 7/00 -- Unity/Tolerance
    
    **WEEK SIXTEEN: Final Exam Week**
                homework: study for final exam
    12/12/00 -- **Final Exam** (3:00 p.m. - 4:50 p.m.)
    
    **N. B.: Homework is listed before the class for which it is due!**
    

**THIS SYLLABUS MAY BE MODIFIED AS THE TEACHER FEELS NECESSARY!**

* * *

[![Return to OHIO VALLEY COLLEGE Home Page ](../ovc.gif) ![Return to OHIO
VALLEY COLLEGE Home Page ](../hompgbtn.gif)](../index.htm)
http://www.ovc.edu/terry/sylbi346.htm Last updated September 21, 2000.  
Page maintained by [Bruce Terry](mailto:rbterry@ovc.edu).

