# The University of Arizona  
School of Library Science

## LIS 401/501  
Knowledge Structures I  
Fall Semester 1995

[Charley Seavey](../lf/faculty/seavey.html), Professor  
Room 12, 520-621-3957  
[cas@convx1.ccit.arizona.edu](mailto:

cas@convx1.ccit.arizona.edu)  
Office Hours: 9-10, TR, 10-12, W, or by appointment

Course Time/Location: Tuesday-Thursday, 11:00-12:15 pm, Psych 307

**Course Information**

_Students are responsible for knowing the contents of this syllabus and
completing all assignments in accordance with the schedule herein. If it is in
here, you are expected to know it._

The organization of information is a broad area drawing from such diverse
disciplines as linguistics, psychology, history, and mathematics, for example.
The simplest principles include orders based on an alphabet, or naturally
occurring attributes such as those forming the basis of the table of the
elements. The most complex principles can involve construction of elaborate
thesauri, computational theories, and complex computer networking. While
principles of organization involve models and schemes used to present and
access information resources, they are always mindful of the needs of the user
as the prime determinant of the principles to be used.

The objectives of the course are:

  * To become acquainted with various systems and theories relating to the organization and classification of information, and the principles evolving from them, 
  * To identify, define, and describe the elements of bibliographic descriptions, classification schemes, and techniques of subject access, and 
  * To understand these tools in both the manual and automated environments. 
  * **The most important objective of all:** The development of critical thinking skills.
**REQUIREMENTS**

  1. "Classification" presentation: 40% 
  2. Student classification scheme: 15% 
  3. Cataloging exercises: 35% 
  4. Final exam: 10% 
  5. Informed participation in class.

1\. **"Classification" Presentation.** There are numerous ways of organizing
various pieces of the totality of knowledge. Each student will select such an
area and, in an oral presentation, explain to the class (and professor) the
origins, thinking, changes, and present shape of that system. **The system
selected must arise from a field outside traditional library approaches to
classification. I am not interested in how librarians did it....** I have used
the term "classification" here in its loosest interpretation. There may, or
may not, be numeric, or alpha-numeric, symbols assigned to various categories.

Some examples:

  * How do botanists classify plants? 
  * How do geologists classify the various strata of the earth? 
  * Is there a classification system for climates? 
  * What else can you think of?

The ability to verbally impart information to a number of people is an
important skill in any setting involving information transfer. The class
presentations are to be treated as a formal presentation to a group of unknown
(or mostly so) individuals whom you are educating on your topic. You may use
whatever graphic aids you deem necessary to get the point across. The time
limit for the presentation will be decided upon once enrollment is set. In
general you will not have more than 12 minutes to get your point across. At
the end of the assigned time limit, the gong goes off. There is no tolerance
factor. The criteria I use to grade presentations is attached to this
syllabus. sification system of your choice. Each item will have subject
headings assigned from Sears, LCSH, and a subject authority list of your
choice. The result of this is that each item has one (1) cataloging record,
with three (3) possible call numbers, andis a disaster. See the Important
Information pags, books (as physical objects)-- you get the idea.

3\. **Cataloginorks on ses.** During the semester you will prepare original
cataloging records for the following:

  1. A single author monograph not in a series. 
  2. A book in a series. 
  3. An edited work. 
  4. A U.S. federal publication. 
  5. A serial.

Each item will be cataloged according to AACR2R. Each item will be classified
in Dewey, Library of Congress, and a classification system of your choice.
Each item will have subject headings assigned from Sears, LCSH, and a subject
authority list of your choice. The result of this is that each item has one
(1) cataloging record, with three (3) possible call numbers, andis a disaster.
See the Important Information pages below, and take them seriously.

Readings come from the Course Packet, works on Reserve, and your textbooks. In
addition to the readings, I will expect you to be able to locate
**http://www.oclc.org/fp** as we will be using that page during the course.
Can you locate other pages that might be relevant?

**Required Texts**

Anglo-American Cataloging Rules, Second Edition, 1988 Revision. (AACR2R).
Chicago, ALA: 1988.

Lois Mai Chan, Cataloging and Classification: An Introduction. 2nd ed, McGraw
Hill, 1994.

You are expected to have read the assigned readings prior to each class, and
be prepared for discussion. Readings will be included on the exam, and should
be considered while writing your papers.

The readings presented in this packet are not the entire body of literature
for this subject: you are strongly encouraged to read widely. Chan has a large
number of relevant citations which you are encouraged to investigate.

**Ranganathan's Laws** _Books are for use  
Every reader his book  
Every book its reader  
Save the time of the reader  
Library is a growing organism  
_

S.R. Ranganathan was writing about libraries, but it seems to me that
everything said here, given a few pronoun and noun changes, can be applied to
the organization of knowledge in any situation. After close to 30 years in the
information business I'm not sure that it doesn't all come down to these five
sayings in the end.

**Tentative Schedule of Events and Reading Assignments**

Tentative only because schedules are always meant to be flexible. We may get
on a tear about something, or an interesting speaker may wander into town, or
who knows. Regardless of where I am, you lot keep up with the readings!

T 8/24: Introduction to the Course and its Concepts

R 8/29: Information: What is it?

Machlup, Fritz. "The Mapping of the Sciences" chapter 6 of his Knowledge: Its
Creation, Distribution, and Economic Significance. (Princeton UP, 1982) pages
60-78.

T 8/31: Organization. Why?

R 9/5: Alphabets and Other Coding Systems

Logan, Robert K. "A Comparison of Eastern and Western Writing Systems and
Their Impact on Cultural Patterns" chapter 3 of his The Alphabet Effect: The
Impact of the Phonetic Alphabet on the Development of Western Civilization St.
Martin's Press, 1986, pages 46-58.

R 9/7: Printing and Publishing I

Logan, Robert K. "The Printing Press: Enhancing the Alphabet Effect" chapter
12 of his The Alphabet Effect: The Impact of the Phonetic Alphabet on the
Development of Western Civilization St. Martin's Press, 1986, pages 176-193.

T 9/12: Printing and Publishing II

R 9/14: Printing and Publishing III

Ledgard, Henry, E., Patrick McQuaid, and Andrew Singer. Appendix A: ASCII
Character Set. From Baker Street to Binary. (McGraw Hill ,1983) p.239-240.

T 9/19: Methods of Organization: Cataloging, Classification, Subject Analysis.

Chan: Introduction, chapters 1, 2, 7, 11, 14.

Hyman, Richard Joseph. "Organization of Information Before the Nineteenth
Century" chapter 1 of his Information Access Capabilities and Limitations of
Printed and Computerized Sources (ALA, 1989) pages 1-9.

Mann, Margaret. "How to Read a Book Technically" Introduction to the
Cataloging and Classification (ALA, 1943) pages 11-30.

Herdman, Margaret M. "History of Classification" Classification: An
Introductory Manual (ALA, 1978), pages 10-28.

Hagler, Ronald. "Access Points" The Bibliographic Record and Information
Technology (ALA, 1991) pages 64-82.

R 9/21: MARC, OCLC, etc.

Chan: chapter 15.

T 9/26: More MARC and the Implications Thereof.

AACR2R: xii-xxv.

R 9/28: Classification in Depth: Dui I.

Chan, chapter 12.

Introductory material in the DDC20 volumes.

T 10/3: Dui II.

R 10/5: The Library of Congress Classification System.

Chan, chapter 13.

Introductory material in the LC schedules.

T 10/10- T 10/24: "Classification" Systems: Student Presentations.

R 10/26: LC II

T 10/31: Subject Analysis: Sears, LCSH.

Chan, chapters 8,9, review 7.

R 11/2: Other Subject Analysis Systems

Chan, chapter 10.

T 11/7: Putting it all together: Bibliographic Records as Information
Surrogates.

R 11/9: Descriptive Cataloging.

Chan, chapters 3, 4.

T 11/14: More on Bibliographic Records.

Chan, chapter 5.

R 11/16: Sudoc, or, How the Government Does It

T 11/21: The Innovators: Bliss and Ranganathan

Chan: Chapter 14 if you haven't already read it.

R 11/23: Happy Thanksgiving!

T 11/28:. More Ranga...

R 11/30: Electronic Access I.

Meadows, Charles T. "Representation of Information" chapter 3 of his Text
Information Retrieval Systems (Academic Press, 1992) pages 32-48.

T 12/5: Electronic Access II.

Graham, Peter S. "Intellectual Preservation in the Electronic Environment"
After the Revolution, Will You be the First to Go? (ALA, 1993) pages 18-38.

R 12/7: The End.

Usually in this class I take any questions that are unanswered somewhere along
the line. If you can get them to me in writing by Tuesday the 5th it would be
appreciated. If nothing is written, we'll take them from the floor. If nothing
gets asked, there is no telling what I might do. Think about it.

**COMMUNICATIONS**

I will check my email several times a day. You can leave a message for me in
my mailbox. If the announced office hours are inconvenient, please see me for
an appointment.

A listserv is setup for the class. ThP>3B. Unless your word processor/computer
combination supports true proportional spacing, kindly do not use full
justification. We prefer a ragged right margin to funny spacing in the lines.

3A is correct according to the directions. 3B is incorrecerpts from the Code
in the SLS student organization handbook.

If you are not sure what any of this means, find oand grammaerpret this very
glish. Papers not meeting these standards will be redone until they do so,
losing points along the way. Suggestions on how to write for this course are
attached.

3A. Unless your word processor/computer combination supports true proportional
spacing, kindly do not use full justification. We prefer a ragged right margin
to funny spacing in the lines.

    
    
    3B. Unless your word processor/computer combination supports true proportional spacing, kindly do not use full justification.  We prefer a ragged right margin to funny spacing in the lines.

3A is correct according to the directions. 3B is incorrect from the Code in
the SLS student organization handbook.

If you are not sure what any of this means, find out. I interpret this very
strictly. Unless specific permission is granted for group, or team projects, I
expect that your work will reflect only you own efforts.

Kindly observe the rules for citing material in your written work. If you do
not know what they are, find out. Improper citation is a major roadblock on
the information highway. Use of someone else's material without proper
citation is intellectually dishonest. See the Code of Academic Integrity.
Generally, I don't care what style manual you use, although I prefer those
that use the author's(s) full name rather than just initials.  
  
  
  

    
    
    SCHOOL OF LIBRARY SCIENCE
    University of Arizona
    LIS 501: Introduction to the Organization of Information
    
    "CLASSIFICATION" PRESENTATION EVALUATION FORM
    
    
    NAME____________________________________________________
    
    CLASS SYSTEM__________________________________________________
    
    TIME______________
    
    1. Explanation of the system: 
    
    
    Background
    
    
    Changes
    
    
    Basis for differentiation or cardinality
    
    
    Current thinking
    
    
    
    2. "Stage Presence"  voice, diction, clarity.
    
    
    
    
    
    
    2. Use of visuals/handouts/AV
    
    
    
    
    
    
    4. Overall impression
    
    

* * *

### Go to [Fall Schedule of Classes.](../lf/admin/sch_f95.html#LIS501)

### Go to [Fall Syllabi menu.](../lf/admin/syl_f95.html)

_This document was last updated on August 4, 1995._  
URL:http://timon.sir.arizona.edu/syllabus/f95_501.html

