![](images/title1.gif)  
![](images/map.gif)

NORTH AMERICAN INDIAN CULTURES  
SOA (SOC) 280A  
TTH 10:00 - 11:20 a.m.  
Fall Semester 2001  
[Dr. Bonhage-Freund](freund/freund1.htm)



**COURSE SYLLABUS**

**Course Description:**

> This course is an introductory survey of the traditional "First Nations"
cultures of North America from first contact until the closing of the
frontier. When Europeans began to colonize the New World in the Sixteenth
Century, they encountered an astounding number of cultural, ethnic, and
linguistic groups with distinct religions, economies, socio-political systems,
and historical trajectories. The end result of this contact was the
assimilation, modification, or destruction of many of these native societies,
but native cultures also affected those of the conquerors.

>

> We will explore cultures from the Inuit of the frozen arctic, to the Calusa
of the Gulf Coast, and from the Peublos of the Southwest, to the Leni-Lenape
encountered by William Penn. In between there will be peoples of temperate
rain forests, coastal plains, hunters, farmers, and of course the inhabitants
of Michigan and the greater midwest.

>

> Basic anthropological concepts are integreated into this course, including
those of "culture areas," and the socio-political continuum from egalitarian
bands to stratified proto-states. Studies of Native American cultural
development and interactions with Old World peoples presents an alternate view
of United States' history. In addition, students will gain a broader
understanding of what is means to be "human."

>

> SOA (SOC) 280A takes a cultural-historical-ecological approach to the study
of North American Indian cultures, form the early "contact period" through the
closing of the frontier. It does not deal with more contemporary Native
American cultures or issues.

**Course Objectives:**

> \- "Search and replace" misinformation about First Nations, substituting
historically inaccurate ethnohistory and ethnogrpahy

>

> \- Gain a comparative perspective of traditional Native American Cultures

>

> \- Acheive a more inclusive perspective of United States history, a greater
appreciation for the diversity and flexibility of human cultural adaptations,
and perhaps some new thoughts on what it means to be "human"

>

>> **Required Materials:**

> These books are available in the [Scot
Shop](http://shop.efollett.com/htmlroot/storehome/almacollege458.html), our
college bookstore.

>

>> _A Native American Encyclopedia: History, Culture, and Peoples_ , Barry M.
Pritzker, ed., Oxford University Press, 2000.

>>

>> _Native Americans: The Indigenous People of North America,_ Collin F.
Taylor and William C. Sturtevant, eds., Thunder Bay Press, (Advantage
Publisher's Group), reprint edition (Sept. 1999).

> **Course Requirements:**

> This is a seminar course. That means that the course is reading and
discussion intensive. Please be prepared to discuss the readings and the
issues scheduled for each class. Students will also give presentations of
their independent research.

>

> 1\. Journal or Participation in Forums:

>

>> Each student is required to participate in the online forums as explained
in class. If the technology fails, students will instead keep a journal in
which they reflect on the course materical and presentations. This journal
does not replace the personal notebook. Rather it is a place to react to the
course and to synthesize your notes. At a minimum, this journal should contain
personal and thoughtful responses to assigned and personally selected readings
and to class discussion. Homework questions will be discussed either in the
forum or notebook. More deatils will be given in class. Anyone who maintains a
B average or better on the forum/journal will be exempt from the final exam.

>

> 2\. Term Papers:

>

>> Each student will submit two term papers over the course of the sememster.
Each paper should be eight to ten pages in length, exclusive of footnotes,
illustrations, appendices, and list of sources. Papers must be double-spaced,
in 10-12 point type in an easily readable style (e.g. Times New Toman,
Courier, NOT Gothic, Blackboard or Script). Papers should include a complete
list of sources (formerly known as bibliography), including ALL sources (even
internet, human informants, videotapes, etc.). All direct quotes and original
ideas (ideas found in only one source, or the originator of a unique idea)
must be footnoted or backnoted.

>>

>> **The Internet Rule**

>>

>>> For each web source that you use, you must also yse two non-web sources,
such as print media, scholarly films, or qualified informants. Some books,
journals and newpapers may be found in complete online editions. These count
as traditional print media. For each web source you use you must identify the
editor or author of the site, and his or her qualificaions to write on your
research topic. Qualified informants must also be documented in this way. This
documentation can be included in an appendix at the end of the paper.

>>>

>>>  

**First Term Paper:**

> This is an in-depth cultural or historical study of a particular culture
(tribe or chiefdom), or the general characteristcs associated with the culture
troups in a particular geographical/ecological zone, a.k.a. "culture area," or
linguistic group. This must be based on ethnographic matericals, NOT
archeaological research. (Prehistoric cultures are covered in the North
American Archaeology course.) You MAY choose to treat this as a modified book
review. That is, you may critically read and evaluate an entire book and use
it as the core of your paper. You must supplement this book with at least five
additional resources. The bibliography must be annotated.

**Second Term Paper:**

> This is a more tradidtional research paper, preferably framed by a specific
research problem or set of problems. Each student's topic and culture area
should be unique so the instructor must approve it. The bibliography must be
annotated.

>

>> Topic Examples

>>

>>   1. The development of native agriculture in the Midwest

>>   2. Influences of the Spanish on late prehistoric chiefdoms in the
Southeast

>>   3. Was the potlatch a reaction to European contact?

>>   4. Adaptations to the desert environment by historic Peublo peoples
(substitute differnt environments and peoples, e.g., Arctic and Inuit)

>>   5. Ritual and mythology in social integration among the XXX people

>>   6. The roles of warfare and violence in XXX cultures (e.g., Plains,
Iroquoian)

>>   7. First Nations' influences on early historic Indian cultures

>>   8. Gender roles among the XXX peoples

>>   9. Native Americans: noble role models or ordinary human beings

>>   10. Slavery, tribute and other forms of subordination among early
historic Indian cultures

>>   11. Nineteenth Century revitalization movements

>>   12. Interaction of XXX with missionaries or with traders

>>   13. Role of Europeans in the weakening of the Iroquois League

>>   14. You get the idea, come up with your own if you prefer

>>

**Oral Presentations:**

> At an appropriate point in the course, each student must present the results
of their research in progress. Please consider this when choosing your topic.
The papers and topics will be coordinated with the seminar topics. Of course,
the earlier presentations will be less critically evaluated than the later
ones. Three will be one presentation for each paper for a total of two
presentations. Due dates will be determined in advance. There will be no
surprises.

**Final Examination:**

> This CUMULATIVE examination is required of students who do not maintain a
minimum of a B average in the forum/journal. For everyone else it is optional,
but you must inform the instructor if you plan not to take the exam.

**Class Participation:**

> Often the student and professor's perceptions vary in this highly subjective
area. Therefore, no points or letter grade are assigned for this.
Nevertheless, in a case where a student's grade is borderline, excellent
participation will boost the students into the next highest grade category.
Below average participation will weigh the grade in the other direction, while
average participation is neutral and what you score is what you get. The
instructor's word will be final on this.

>

>>  

**Grading:**

> **Assignment** | **Format 1** | **Format 2**  
> ---|---|---  
> Forum/Journal | 30% | 15%  
> First Term Paper | 20% | 20%  
> First Presentation | 15% | 15%  
> Second Term Paper | 20% | 20%  
> Second Presentation | 15% | 15%  
> Final Examination |  | 15%  
  


**POSTING OF FINAL GRADES:**

> Grades will not be posted. If you want your grade early, please provide me
with a stamped, self-addressed envelope.

**TOPICS:**

>   1. Introduction: Administrivia; studying the indigenous peoples of North
America

>   2. Peopling of North America

>   3. Government Indian Policies prior to 1890 (closing of the frontier)

>   4. Culture Areas -- what are they?

>     1. Arctic and Subarctic

>     2. Great Basin

>     3. Great Plains

>     4. Southwest

>     5. California

>     6. Plateau and Northwest Coast

>     7. Midwest

>     8. Northeastern Woodlands

>     9. Southeastern Woodlands

>   5. Nativism and Revitalization

>

> > ![](images/native1)



