![Anthropology](index.banner.gif)

**Courses**

     _In the following list, F and W indicate the semester in which the course is regularly taught._
**101\. Social Anthropology.** An introduction to the study of a wide variety
of social and cultural phenomena. The argument that the reality we inhabit is
a cultural construct is explored by examining concepts of race and gender,
kinship and religion, the individual life cycle, and the nature of community.
Course materials consider the poetics and politics of everyday life in
cultures throughout the world, against the background of the emerging global
system. Anthropology 101 is a component course for the women's studies major.
Mr. Danforth, Mr. Kemper. F W  

  * [Winter 2002 Syllabus](Anthro101/Anthro101.html)

**102\. Archeology and Human Evolution.** Introduction to archeological method
and theory, together with an introductory survey of human evolution, from the
appearance of the first primates to the present day. Open to first-year
students. Not open to st udents who have received credit for Anthropology
258\. Enrollment is limited to 45. Mr. Bourque. F  

  * [Fall 2001 Syllabus](Anthro102)

**225\. Gods, Heroes, Magic, and Mysteries: Religion in Ancient Greece.** An
anthropological and historical approach to ancient Greek religion in which
archeological, literary, and art-historical sources are examined and compared
with evidence from othe r cultures to gain an understanding of the role of
religion in ancient Greek culture and of changing concepts of the relationship
between man and the sacred. Topics to be explored include pre-Homeric and
Homeric religion and religious thought, cosmology, mystery cults, civil
religion, and manifestations of the irrational, such as dreams, ecstasy,
shamanism, and magic. This course is the same as Religion 225. Open to first-
year students. Mr. Allison. W

  **228\. Person and Community in Contemporary Africa.** What processes have
led to the present conditions on the African continent? The course examines
the changing patterns of life in rural and urban Africa. Subjects range from
detailed accounts of life in particular communities to the place of Africa in
the modern world system. Anthropology 228 fulfills a distribution requirement
for the African American studies major. Open to first-year students. Ms.
Eames. F

  **234\. Myth, Folklore, and Popular Culture.** A variety of texts, including
ancient Greek myths, Grimms' folktales, Apache jokes, African proverbs, and
Walt Disney comics, are examined in light of important theoretical approaches
employed by anthropolo gists interested in understanding the role of such
expressive forms in cultures throughout the world. Major emphasis is placed on
psychoanalytic, Marxist, and structuralist approaches. The course is the same
as Religion 261. Open to first-year students. E nrollment is limited to 80.
Mr. Danforth. W  

  * [Fall 2001 Syllabus](Anthro234.html)

**239\. Hill Farm, Paddy Field, City, World: Person and Society in Southeast
Asia.** Locked between the great civilizations of India and China, Southeast
Asia is a hugely diverse region, both culturally and topographically. The
contrast between tribal p eoples tending small gardens and the lowland rice-
growing civilizations of Burma, Thailand, and Vietnam is one expression of
this diversity. The course begins with this contrast and considers the
influences of economy, ethnicity, and religion on contempor ary Southeast
Asia. Open to first-year students. Mr. Kemper.

  **240\. Peoples and Societies of South Asia.** A broad survey of the
societies of South Asia, focusing especially on India and Sri Lanka. The
course also presents a more intensive consideration of several representative
societies as an introduction to t he major cultural institutions of the
subcontinent. Open to first-year students. Mr. Kemper.  

  * [Autumn 2000 Syllabus](pssaelectronicsyl.html)

**241\. Anthropological Approaches to the Study of Religion.** As human
societies change, so do the religious beliefs and practices these societies
follow. The course examines the symbolic forms and acts that relate human
beings to the ultimate conditio ns of their existence, against the background
of the rise of science. Emphasis is upon both Western and non-Western
religions. This course is the same as Religion 262. Open to first-year
students. Mr. Kemper.  

  * [Autumn 1999 Syllabus](aasrelectronicsyl.html)

**242\. Political Anthropology.** A survey of the anthropological study of
political life in hunting bands and gathering bands, stateless societies,
colonial systems, and modern nation-states. Attention is also given to the
integration of tribal and ethnic groups within the emerging nations of Africa
and Asia. Open to first-year students. Mr. Kemper.

**242\. FYS: Identities.** Aspects of ourselves we hold most dear, most
changless, are, in actuality, socially fashioned. This seminar examines the
raw materials out of which identities are formed, fixed, and made to appear
timeless. Students consider how our variously gendered, raced, classed, and
otherwise imperatively regarded selves become named, learned, performed, and
enforced in different cultural and institutional settings. Students examine
how systems of production, ownership, and religion help mold notions of
personhood. Through ethnographic interviews, historical research, and the
analysis of print and Web-based texts, students have ample opportunity to
explore in their research papers aspects of personal, family, and other
incorporate identities. Mr. Carnegie. F

  * [Fall 2000 Syllabus](FYS242.html)

  **244\. Buddhism and the Social Order.** The West looks upon Buddhism as an
otherworldly religion with little interest in activity in this world. Such has
not been the case historically. The _Dhamma_ (Buddhist doctrine) has two
wheels, one of right eousness and one of power, one for the other world, and
one for this world. Lectures and discussions use this paradigm to consider the
several accommodations Buddhism has struck with the realities of power in
various Theravada Buddhist societies in ancien t India, Sri Lanka, and
Southeast Asia. This course is the same as Religion 263. Open to first-year
students. Mr. Kemper.  

  * [Winter 1998 Syllabus](bsoelectronicsyl.html)

**250\. Caribbean Societies.** One anthropologist writing of the Caribbean
asserts: "Nowhere else in the universe can one look with such certainty into
the past and discern the outlines of an undisclosed future." Socio cultural
systems in the region have felt the full impact of Western imperial expansion
yet have adjusted to it in resilient and creative ways. The course surveys and
interprets Caribbean social formations drawing on a variety of sources--
historical, ethno graphic, literary, and visual--to present a "post-
nationalist" reading of these societies. Open to first-year students. Mr.
Carnegie. W

  * [Winter 2002 Syllabus](250.html)

  **252\. The Anthropology of Modernity.** Where anthropologists have
traditionally focused on small-scale, self-sufficient societies, this course
considers modernity a cultural system, part of present-day capitalist
enterprise, and a global phenomenon. It does so by considering three practices
central to modern social life: consumption, nationalism and transnationalism,
and post-modernism. Open to first-year students. Mr. Kemper. W  

  * [Autumn 1998 Syllabus](aomelectronicsyl.html)

**253\. Western North America: Native Cultures, Histories, and Environments.**
This course has two objectives. The first is to acquaint students with the
cultural and historical complexity of the American West. To this end, we are
concerned with the W est's substantive history--its exploration and
exploitation, the interplay of European and Native American cultures, the
impact of the frontier upon geopolitical imagination, the efflorescence of
certain religions, and the rise of industrial capitalism. T he second
objective is to encourage a critical questioning of received methods of
historical and cultural inquiry, with the intention of understanding what it
means to construct a historical or cultural "fact." We examine historical,
ethnohistorical, and anthropological works for their commonalities and
differences, in an attempt to see beyond disciplinary boundaries. Mr. Jenkins.
F

  **275\. Gender Relations in Comparative Perspective.** A comparative
analysis, utilizing new feminist approaches in anthropology and psychology, of
the social construction of gender in contemporary societies, with a focus on
West African, East Asian, an d North American notions of gender identity and
gender relations. Anthropology 275 is a core course for the women's studies
major and a component course for the African American studies major. Open to
first-year students. Ms. Eames. W

  **322\. First Encounters: European "Discovery" and North American Indians.**
Columbus's "discovery" of America was a major event in human history because
it put Old and New World populations in contact after millennia of isolation.
This course examines factors leading up to the "discovery" and the calamitous
impact of early colonization upon Native Americans. Prerequisite: Anthropology
101\. Mr. Bourque.

  **325\. Ethnicity, Nation, and World Community.** The course explores the
means by which social identities are constructed as ethnicity and nations. It
focuses on how representations taken from categories of everyday life--such as
"race," religion, gender, and sexuality--are deployed to give these group
loyalties the aura of a natural, timeless authority. This inquiry into
ethnicity and nation as cultural fabrications allows for exploration of the
possibility of global community not simply in its institutional dimensions,
but as a condition of consciousness. Prerequisite(s): any course in
anthropology, political science, or sociology. This course is the same as
Sociology 325. Mr. Carnegie.

  * [Winter 2002 Syllabus](325.html)

  **333\. Culture and Interpretation.** Beginning with a consideration of
symbolic anthropology as it developed in the 1960s and '70s, this course
surveys critiques of the anthropological turn to the study of social life from
the actor's point of view. Em phasis is placed on feminism, reflexive
ethnography, and post-modernism. Mr. Kemper.  

  * [Winter 1999 Syllabus](caielectronicsyl.html)

**335\. The Ethnographer's Craft.** Much of contemporary theoretical
discussion in anthropology derives from self-conscious reflection on what its
practitioners do--fieldwork--and how they write about it. By reading a
selection of classic and contempora ry ethnographies along with critical
discourse on their formulation, and by conducting individual ethnographic
research, participants examine questions of representation, audience, power,
and ethical responsibility entailed by ethnography. The concern is with both
craft and craftiness, skill and artifice. Prerequisite: Anthropology 101. Mr.
Carnegie. F

  * [Fall 2000 Syllabus](Anthro335.html)

  **336\. Ethnohistory of the Andes.** This course is an introduction to the
cultures and histories of the Central Andes and western coastal regions of
South America. We study the effects of Spanish conquest on native religion,
healing practices, and s ocial and political organization in an attempt to
understand indigenous responses to Spanish colonialism. Our point of view is
that native peoples were active agents in the creation and recreation of their
cultures in the face of Spanish domination. Rec ommended background:
Anthropology 101. Not open to students who have received credit for
Anthropology 260. Mr. Jenkins. F

  **339\. Economic Anthropology**. Economic anthropology challenges the
assumptions of conventional economics by analyzing economic behavior from a
cross-cultural perspective. This course looks at the relation between economy
and society through a critica l examination of neoclassical, substantivist,
Marxist, and ecological approaches in anthropology. The relative merits of
these explanatory paradigms are assessed as we engage ethnographic case
material. Such "economic facts" as production, exchange, land tenure, marriage
transactions, state formation, and social change in the modern world-system
are addressed, always in comparative perspective. Prerequisite: a course in
economics or anthropology. Anthropology 339 is required for the anthropology
major and is a suggested elective for the economics major. Ms. Eames. W

  **347\. New World Archeology.** A topical survey of New World prehistory
emphasizing North America, Mesoamerica, and the Andes. Prerequisite:
Anthropology 258. Mr. Bourque. W

  **352\. Sociology of Colonialism.** This course analyzes the colonial
experience, focusing on the African case within its historical, sociological,
and ideological context. The history, theory, and practice of colonialism and
neocolonialism are presente d through social-science material, historical
documents, literature, film, and the popular press. Anthropology 352 is a
component course for both the women's studies and African American studies
majors. Prerequisites: relevant life experience or a course in anthropology,
sociology, political science, or history. Permission of the instructor is
required. Ms. Eames.

  **360\. Independent Study.** Designed for the student who may have
particular interests in areas of study that go beyond the regular course
offerings. Permission of the Department is required prior to registration, and
a detailed, typed prospectus must be submitted to the Chair as part of the
request. Staff.

  **365\. Special Topics.** A course or seminar offered from time to time to
small groups of students working on special topics. May be taken more than
once for credit. Written permission of the instructor is required. Staff.

  **370\. Post-Emancipation Societies: African Americans in Freedom.** For
peoples of African descent throughout the Americas, the emancipation event
represents, arguably, the most momentous phenomenon in their history. It
revolutionized the structure of inter- ethnic social relations and offered
opportunities for the flowering of ideas and social life. The seminar explores
pre-emancipation conditions as well as the promise, the achievements, and the
challenges of this era of renewal for both former slave s and former masters
in the United States, the English-speaking Caribbean, Cuba, and Brazil.
Recommended background: previous courses on slavery, African American studies,
or the Caribbean. Mr. Carnegie. W

  **441\. History of Anthropological Theory.** A consideration of major
theories in the development of the field of anthropology, with an emphasis on
the fundamental issues of orientation and definition that have shaped and
continue to influence anthropol ogical thought. Topics include cultural
evolution, the relationship between the individual and culture, the nature-
nurture debate, British social anthropology, and French structuralism. Mr.
Danforth. F

  **457, 458. Senior Thesis.** Individual and group conferences in connection
with the writing of the senior thesis. Anthropology 458 is required of all
senior majors in the winter semester; honors candidates also register for 457
in the fall semester. O ne course credit is given for each registration.
Prerequisite: approval by the Department of a thesis prospectus prior to
registration. Written permission of the Department Chair is required. Staff.

  **Short-Term Units**  
**s21. Cultural Production and Social Context, Jamaica.** Although Jamaica's
artistic and popular culture enjoys an internationally acclaimed reputation,
it is at the same time often misunderstood. This unit affords students an
opportunity to investiga te a range of Jamaican cultural practices within the
context of the specific social, historical, and political matrices in which
they are generated and received. This unit begins with a preliminary
introduction/orientation in Lewiston. In Jamaica, regular seminar meetings are
supplemented by guest speakers and visits with writers and artists. In
addition, each student carries out an individual research project using both
textual and ethnographic methods of inquiry. This unit is the same as English
s21. Re commended background: previous course on the Caribbean or in African
American studies. Written permission of the instructor is required. Enrollment
is limited to 18. Mr. Carnegie, Mr. Chin.

  **s22. The Politics of Cultural Expression: African Films and Filmmaking.**
African films as self-representation challenge stereotypical images of the
continent in Hollywood movies. They are part of the creation of new images in
the post-independence e ra which help forge national identities through
reinvention of a shared past. Using feature films produced by Africans for an
African audience, this unit explores that struggle and the challenges faced in
contemporary society as seen through African eyes. This unit is the same as
Political Science s22 and is a component of the African American studies
major. Recommended background: a course in African studies and/or film
studies. Enrollment is limited to 35. Ms. Eames, Ms. Hill.

  **s23. Environment and Environmentalism: Native and European Land Use in the
American West.** This unit introduces native American and European practices
and attitudes toward the environment. The geographic focus is on the American
West, with specia l attention paid to the Colorado plateau and the Great
Basin. A five-day backpack trip down Grand Gulch, and a five-day float trip
down the San Juan River (both in southern Utah), give students firsthand
experience with environmental conditions, archeolog ical sites, and land-use
problems in the West. Open to first-year students. Enrollment is limited to
15. Mr. Jenkins.

  **s25. Ethnicity, Bilingualism, Religion, and Gender: Topics in Ethnographic
Fieldwork.** After reading selected works on the nature of ethnographic
fieldwork, on the political and ethical implications of such fieldwork, and on
the different genres of ethnographic writing, students conduct individual
research projects in the Lewiston-Auburn area. Possible topics include ethnic
identity, bilingualism, religious conversion, and gender roles. Enrollment is
limited to 12. Mr. Danforth.

  **s26. Gandhi.** Churchill called Gandhi a "naked fakir." Much of the rest
of the world called him a saint. Besides provoking strong reactions, Gandhi's
life led South Asians to new ways of putting Indian tradition to use and other
societies to unique and powerful ways of dealing with social problems. The
unit considers Gandhi's projects and ideas and their consequences--
Gandhianism, nonviolent protest, appropriate technology--in India and beyond.
Mr. Kemper.

  **s27. Religion and Society in Contemporary Bali.** This unit exposes
students firsthand to a society that is the exuberant example of a Hindu-
Buddhist civilization that once spread over great parts of Southeast Asia. It
attempts to understand the inte raction of religion and society in Bali --
from ordinary people's involvement in an elaborate ritual calendar to the way
traditional practice has responded to the presence of tourists \-- by way of
readings, interviews, lectures, demonstrations, and fieldw ork. Recommended
background: course work on Hinduism, Buddhism, South Asia, Southeast Asia.
Open to first-year students. Written permission of the instructor is required.
Enrollment is limited to 8. Mr. Kemper.

  **s29. Nigerian Narratives: The Construction of History in the Works of
Chinua Achebe and His Contemporaries.** All five novels written by the
internationally acclaimed literary figure Chinua Achebe form the centerpiece
of this unit. Starting with _T hings Fall Apart_ and ending with _Anthills of
the Savannah_ , our topic is the last one hundred years of Nigerian social
history. Other material rounds out this story of struggle and survival in the
face of social upheaval: fiction by Soyinka, Nwa pa, Aluko, and Emecheta;
poetry; myth; oral history; musical performance; and films by African
directors. Achebe's reworking and retelling of his people's past are
juxtaposed with readings from ethnographic, historical, and press sources, in
an effort to understand the power of a storyteller to shape his/her world.
Anthropology s29 is a component course in the African American studies major.
Enrollment is limited to 15. Ms. Eames.

  **s32. Introduction to Archeological Fieldwork.** This field course offers
basic training in archeological survey, excavation, and analysis through work
on prehistoric sites in the Lewiston area. Mr. Bourque.

  **s50. Individual Research.** Registration in this unit is granted by the
Department only after the student has submitted a written proposal for a full-
time research project to be completed during the Short Term and has secured
the sponsorship of a mem ber of the Department to direct the study and
evaluate results. Staff.

* * *

