_

GEORGETOWN COLLEGE  
ENGLISH DEPARTMENT SYLLABUS  
ENGLISH COMPOSITION 111 (3 hrs.) FALL 1999  
PROFESSOR: M. Brady  
OFFICE: Pawling Hall 110  
OFFICE HOURS: MWF 12:00-2:00 and by appointment  
CAMPUS PHONE: ext. 8132  
E-MAIL: [mbrady@georgetowncollege.edu](mailto:mbrady@georgetowncollege.edu)

_**COURSE DESCRIPTION** (from college catalog): this course  "develops
satisfactory proficiency in basic skills of composition and reading
comprehension. Students must demonstrate their ability to [achieve college-
level writing proficiency by producing] a portfolio of literate, reasonably
logical and perceptive short themes. Grades given are A, B, C, or X
(conditional incomplete--to be satisfied by repeating the course)."

**

REQUIRED TEXTS**: Lunsford, Andrea, and Robert Connors. _The New St. Martin's

Handbook_. Boston: Bedford-St. Martin's, 1999.

McQuade, Donald, and Robert Atwan, eds. _Thinking in Writing: Rhetorical
Patterns and Critical Response_. 4th ed. Boston: McGraw-Hill, 1998.

**

COURSE OBJECTIVES**: By the end of this course, you must demonstrate college-
level writing proficiency. Based on assigned readings, you will brainstorm,
outline, draft, edit, write, and revise eight 400 to 500-word essays. Some
essays will be written in-class and some out-of-class. To demonstrate your
proficiency, you will produce a portfolio of essays that exemplifies your
ability to do the following: limit subjects, organize ideas relevant to a
subject, support generalizations, use appropriate modes of writing and
thinking, use English language grammar correctly, use diction appropriate to
your purpose, audience, and attitude, use various writing styles that clearly
communicate your ideas, and demonstrate comprehension of reading material and
critical thinking skills in your analysis and use of ideas.

**

COURSE REQUIREMENTS**:

1\. **Attendance Policy** : _THERE ARE NO EXCUSED ABSENCES_ You are allowed 5
absences during the semester in case of illness, emergencies, or extra-
curricular activities. If you exceed 5 absences, you will receive an  "X" in
this course.

2\. **Academic Honesty Policy** : if you submit another person's work as your
own or fail to indicate your use of quotes or ideas from any source, you will
receive an "X" for the course and be reported to the Academic Dean.

3\. **Format for "first graded version" essays: **essays may either be typed
or written. Use 8 1/2" x 11" (or approximate size), white, loose-leaf paper;
double space; put your name, class, and section in the upper right-hand corner
of the first page of your essays; number pages clearly in the upper right-hand
corner, beginning with page 2; use a paper clip to bind essay pages.

4\. **Folders** : Keep every essay's final draft, graded version, revision,
and score sheet in a pocket folder. This work documents the process you
complete in order to produce your course portfolio. Once you are ready to
submit a portfolio for evaluation, put these assignments in a file folder.
Your pocket folder containing both portfolio essays and other completed essays
should be turned into me no later than 12-13-99; if you do not turn in a
complete folder, you will receive an X.

5\. **Work Completion:** You must complete all of the steps in the composition
process for all assigned essays and revisions of essays.

6\. **" Late" Assignments**: If you have more than 6 late assignments, you
will receive an "X" in this course. "Late" means not turned in to the
professor during the class period time and day on which the assignment is due.
_Absence is not an excuse for having a late assignment; there are no excused
absences, so send your work with someone else, if you are unable to attend
class_.

If a "first" version of an essay is late, you should make arrangements with me
to have the essay graded as soon as possible so that the revision of the essay
will not constitute a second late assignment.

7\. **Final Exam** : If you satisfy the proficiency standard before the end of
the semester, you do not have to take the final. However, if you want the
final to count toward attaining an "A" or "B" for the class, you may take it.

**

COURSE EVALUATION**: You pass this course with an A, B, or C on your
portfolio; if you do not pass, you will receive an "X" which does not affect
your grade-point-average; however, you will not receive three hours credit.
You must take the course again in order to demonstrate proficiency.

Your essays are scored by using a grid sheet with a 30-point scale. A sample
score sheet and explanation are attached to the syllabus. Scores are recorded
for four MAJOR and two MINOR areas. The MAJOR areas are content, support of
generalizations, organization, grammar and mechanics; the MINOR areas are
diction and style. Scores range from 1 (weak) to 5 (strong).

**HOW TO PASS THIS COURSE:** produce a portfolio that includes three types of
essays (see below). For the first  "graded" version of each type of essay, you
must score at least 16 points and have a score of at least 3 for each of the
four MAJOR criteria.

A. one "test" essay: this is an essay written in-class.

B. one "text-based" essay: this is an essay written out-of-class and based on
assigned readings which demonstrates your ability to understand texts and to
respond to ideas in a thoughtful and logical way.

C. one "text-based" essay written either in or out of class.

You must fulfill all assignments. Theoretically, you _could_ fulfill the
portfolio requirement after writing three assigned essays, but most students
require the entire semester in order to fulfill the portfolio requirement.

The final exam may count as a 3rd portfolio essay or as a 4th or 5th
proficiency essay that you use in order to achieve an A or B for the course
(see below). Individuals will be working according to their own abilities, and
therefore fulfilling criteria at different times, so be sure that what you
think you have accomplished and what I have recorded are the same.

**

HOW TO PASS THIS COURSE WITH A GRADE OF B OR A**:

l. To make a B, meet all criteria to make a C, plus score at least 20-24
points on two of the three portfolio essays' first versions or revisions, and
have one other essay which scores at least 20 (with scores of at least 3 for
each of the MAJOR criteria on the first graded version).

2\. To make an A, meet all criteria to make a C, plus score at least 25-30
points on two of the three portfolio essays' first versions or revisions, and
have at least two other essays which score at least 20 (with scores of at
least 3 for each of the MAJOR criteria on the first versions).

**

COURSE SCHEDULE**: you are responsible for knowing changes that may be
announced in class. Pages refer to _Thinking in Writing_.

**

Sept. 1 **Roll; Introduction to course; Syllabus distribution

F 03 Diagnostic essay

M 06 1-17

W 08 18-32; paragraph to evaluate

F 10 143-46; essay to evaluate

M 13 179-87

W 15 188-91

F 17

M 20 have a sentence outline of #1 essay

W 22 have draft of #1 essay

F 24 have first version #1 essay; 195-99, 200-03

M 27 204-07, 208-11

W 29 213-25

**

F Oct. 1 **have revision of #1 essay; 231-38

M 04 have sentence outline for #2 essay

W 06 have draft of #2 essay

F 08 have first version of #2 essay; 239-43

M 11 253-57, 258-62

W 13 264-72

F 15 have revision of #2 essay; 273-77

M 18 FALL BREAK

W 20 review classification mode; prepare for in-class essay

F 22 in-class write first version of #3 essay

M 25 279-90

W 27 308-21

F 29 have revision of #3 essay; 291-93

M **Nov.** 1 have sentence outline of #4 essay

W 03 have draft of #4 essay

F 05 have first version of #4 essay; 323-26, 336-40

M 08 349-52

W 10 353-58

F 12 have revision of #4 essay; write in-class first version #5 essay

M 15 411-15, 442-46

W 17 447-52

F 19 write in-class first version of #6 essay

M 22 have revision of #5 essay; 361-66

W 24 have revision of #6 essay; 397-410

F 26 THANKSGIVING

M 29 have sentence outline of #7 essay

W **Dec.** 01 have draft of #7 essay

F 03 have first version of #7 essay; 453-65

M 06 508-13

W 08 514-20

F 10 have revision of #7; write in-class first version of #8 essay

M 13 revise #8 essay in-class if needed for portfolio; review for final







