CELTIC IRELAND, SCOTLAND, WALES:

IDENTITY AND CONFLICT IN THE BRITISH ISLES

SPRING SEMESTER 2002

DR. TRACY

SYLLABUS  


Class Meetings: Carroll Room 2226 Mondays and Wednesdays 3:30PM

Office Hours: Mon. and Wed., 10:15-11:30; 2:00-3:15 Office: Carroll Room 2218

Phone (912) 681-5699 FAX (912) 681-5348

e-mail: [stracy@gasou.edu](mailto:stracy@gasou.edu) Web site:
http//www2.gasou.edu:80/facstaff/tracy/  


Course Description:

"The Celts were one of the peoples in prehistoric Europe who helped to create
the European civilization of the past thousand years". Myles Dillon and Nora
Chadwick, _The Celtic Realms_ , 1967.

"Where jargon turns living issues into abstractions, and where jargon ends by
competing with jargon, people don't have causes. They only have enemies, only
the enemies are real". V.S. Naipaul, _The Return of Eva Peron_.

This course will examine the "enemies"; both the obvious and the subtle
tensions. An historical background will set the path for our journey this
semester. Why is there conflict between England and the "other" isles of
Britain? Why are Ireland and Northern Ireland warring? When did this all
begin? Why has conflict continued? Who is winning? Is there a solution in
sight?

Course Purpose:

To answer these questions and others, we must examine the struggle of the
Celtic peoples of the British Isles-in Ireland, Scotland, and Wales to
preserve against the greater strength of an increasingly imperial English
monarchy, their own political and cultural identities. Of the three, Ireland
receives special emphasis because there the struggle against British dominance
has continued down to the present day, with significant disruptions and
violence especially in Northern Ireland.

In a post-colonial world in which former colonies of past European empires are
casting off the burdens of colonialism and redefining their identities in
terms of indigenous cultures long denigrated by foreign masters, the
experience of the Celtic peoples of the British Isles, in their centuries-long
struggle to hold to a cultural identity not imposed upon them by a foreigner,
has continuing relevance.

It is against this backdrop that this course will explore the problems and
fears of rather prosperous democratic countries, not of the Third World, but
as locked in differences, and even in combat, as any developing country in our
time.

That many students at Georgia Southern University have ancestral ties to the
three Celtic nations-Ireland, Scotland, and Wales-gives this course added
relevance, for it provides them the opportunity to study their heritage.  
    
    


Required texts:

_The History of Scotland_ , Peter and Fiona Fry, 1982.

_Hope Against History: The Course of Conflict in Northern Ireland_ , Jack
Holland, 1999.

_Loyalists: War and Peace in Northern Ireland_ , Peter Taylor, 1999.  


Assigned texts:

_A History of Britain_ , Simon Schama, 2000.

_A History of Wales_ , John Davies, 1993.

_Celt and Saxon_ , Peter Ellis, 1993.  


Classroom Policies:

Attendance: Four (4) absences will be allowed; addition absences will result
in the dropping of grades. As this is equal to two weeks of the semester,
there should be no reason to exceed this amount. Should additional absences be
necessary, it may be best to consider withdrawal from the class. While class
participation will not equate with actual points, it will be considered when
calculating your final point scores.

Courtesies: No one will be allowed to enter the classroom once the class has
begun without prior approval from the professor.

Personal discussions should be conducted outside the classroom. You will
receive one (1) warning; the 2nd time, you will lose ten (10) points; the 3rd,
you will lose a letter grade; and the 4th instance, you will be dropped from
the class.

No smoking or eating is allowed in the classroom. Thank you for your courtesy.

Other: A make-up exam can be taken only with the _prior_ permission of the
professor. No one will be excused from taking the final exam. There will be
**NO MAKE-UP** for the final exam.

Any student(s) whom the professor finds engaged in academic dishonesty
(cheating/plagiarism) will receive an F for the course and will subsequently
reported to the Georgia Southern academic governing board.  


VI. Grading System:

Grades will be based on the following point system:  
  Opinion papers (4 @ 50 points each) = 200  
---  
Mid-term exam = 100  
Final exam = 200  
Total = 500 Points  
450-500 = A  
400-449 = B  
350-399 = C  
500 300-349 = D  
299------ = F  
  
VII. Assignments:

Dates may vary due to the availability of outside resources.  


Week 1 Introduction

2 Historical context-Great Britain

3 The Welsh: History, Culture and Politics

4 **1 st OPINION PAPER DUE (January 30, 2002)**

5 Scotland: History, Culture and Politics

6

7 **2 nd OPINION PAPER DUE (February 20, 2002)**

**MID-TERM EXAM (February 20, 2002)**

8 Ireland: History, Culture and Politics

9

10 **3 rd OPINION PAPER DUE (March 6, 2002)**

11 Ireland and Northern Ireland: Conflict and Contrast

12 The Peace Process

13 **4 th OPINION PAPER DUE (March 27, 2002)**

14 Issues of the Isles (Constitutional Changes, Languages, etc.)

15 The Future  


**FINAL EXAM: MAY 3, 2001 3:00-5:00 P.M.**

