>  
>

> Princeton **Weekly Bulletin** May 11, 1998

>

> * * *

>

>  
>

> # Graduate students staff Web Factory

>

> |

>

> **![](m/0511-1a.jpg)  
>  
>  Graduate student Greg Lyon (l), Web page consultant, with History
instructor Frank Trentmann  
>   **  
>  
> ---|---  
> There is increasing Princeton faculty presence on the World Wide Web, thanks
to a program called Web Factory.

>

> A recent initiative of the PLACE (Princeton Laboratory for Advancing
Curricular Excellence, at 87 Prospect St.), Web Factory sends graduate
students hired and trained by Computing and Information Technology to help
faculty learn to put their course materials on the Web. "Our mission is to
empower faculty to use new media -- meaning digital media -- in their
courses," says David Herrington, manager of the PLACE. This academic year Web
Factory is responsible for 54 course pages.

>

> While faculty members have asked about putting materials on the Web for some
time, Web Factory is "proactive, an outreach program," according to Wendy
Chun, a graduate student in English who coordinates the program for CIT. Part
of Chun's effort has been to recruit nine other graduate students and
supervise their training.

>

> Says Herrington, "Wendy took it from an informal thing where faculty came
over here to ask questions, to a program that provides graduate student
instructor-helpers who go to the professor's office to work on the project."
Chun calls the latter service, appropriately enough, "the office visit." She
points out a benefit for the graduate students as well as for the faculty:
"Since graduate students at Princeton don't teach their own courses, working
with a faculty member on a Web page gives an opportunity to see how a course
is created, to think about assignments and syllabi. It can be part of the
training of graduate students."

>

> ### CourseWare

>

> Central to Web Factory is software called CourseWare, an automated course
home page builder, developed by CIT's Serge Goldstein, George Fleming and
Chun. It asks for basic information such as department, title, place of
meeting, course description and requirements.

>

> Course Web pages can exist on many levels of complexity, Herrington points
out. "They may simply include basic information and the course syllabus. Or
they may offer additional content such as problem sets, Web resources, e-mail
links and the like."

>

> Though CIT e-mailed all faculty members about Web Factory ("If you are
interested in putting your course materials on the Web, but need some help
getting started..."), many people were reached "by word of mouth," says Chun.

>

> ### Reductions in confusion

>

> Herrington emphasizes that Web Factory "doesn't cost academic departments
anything." It does take a faculty member's time -- the amount of time
depending on the person, the course and the materials.

>

> It can also save time, according to Professor of English James Richardson,
who set up a page for his Contemporary Poetry course with the help of Web
Factory. English graduate student Steven Nardi "taught me how to set the page
up in about an hour and a half. I've maintained it myself since then,"
Richardson says. "I haven't been that imaginative in using it -- though I've
got links to some poetry sites on the Web (Steven did those).

>

> "The main advantages for me," he notes, "have been tremendous reductions in
confusion and paper-handling. When there's a handout, I put it on the Web. I
don't have to make 70 copies, there isn't a lot of confusion passing it around
at the beginning of lecture, and I don't have to take copies to the next
lecture for those who weren't there the first time. And nobody who loses a
syllabus needs to come to me for one; they just download another copy."

>

> ### Songs by Chumbawamba

>

> A recent Web Factory alumnus is Instructor in History Frank Trentmann, who
has created a Web page for his lecture course on Modern Britain, Empire and
Ireland.

>

> The course, he says, explores "the social, cultural and political
transformations in the lives of women and men in Britain from the 18th century
to the present." Trentmann's CIT guide through the electronic forest was Greg
Lyon, a graduate student in history.

>

> Before Web Factory, Trentmann "knew what a Web page was, and knew people had
them," he says, but he had no idea how to build one himself. He responded to
the Web Factory e-mail message from CIT because he wanted to make material
available to the students beyond the copied selection of readings. For graphic
images, "Sometimes copy reproduction isn't very good," he says, "and, if you
want to do anything in color, the cost is prohibitive. Forget Gainsborough!"

>

> Because CIT can scan images (including film and video) and digitize sound,
Trentmann's course Web page now offers images -- such as Hogarth engravings
and photographs of punks and Princess Diana; maps, graphs, complex diagrams
and charts; and music. "In class I can only play a couple of minutes of Ralph
Vaughan Williams's _Sea Symphony_ and discuss it with students," he says.
Through a link on the web syllabus, "students can hear the entire last
movement."

>

> Trentmann points out that it is also possible to create links to materials
that exist elsewhere on the Web. "For example," he says, "the map of the
British Isles is accessed through the on-line _Encyclopedia Britannica_."
Again, to complement the examination of contemporary British culture, students
hear songs by Chumbawamba, a contemporary band that styles itself "pop
anarchist." There is a link to Chumbawamba's own Web page, "which offers
lyrics to all their songs and links to underground popular political
newsletters."

>

> Without Lyon's technical help, says Trentmann, "I could never have done
this; it's not as easy as it looks."

>

> ### What is possible

>

> Lyon sees his job as "helping the professors understand their Web pages, so
they can maintain them. At the first meeting, I discuss what is possible and
try to get them thinking about what they want to achieve with the Web page.
Some want very simple things, like having the syllabus available for both
their students and for colleagues at other institutions. Others, like Frank
Trentmann, want images scanned and texts made available so students have a
richer new media experience."

>

> In the second meeting, says Lyon, "We set up the basic Web site, including
the syllabus and basic information; the professor does this;

>

> I only coach. I try to make it as easy as possible for the professors
themselves to realize their ideas about the site. That means arranging things
to be scanned, being available for help," and, inevitably, "fixing things that
would take longer to explain than to fix myself."

>

> Students seem to respond favorably to the Web presence. Says Michael D'Alba
'98, "I can't make the argument that it necessarily helps me learn more. It
does help me learn more efficiently. When I wanted a map of Britain to study
for the midterm, for instance, I went to the Web site from my computer rather
than to the atlas in the Firestone reference room. That saved me some time
over the course of the day."

>

> ### Responsibility for proper use

>

> While Trentmann is "not a fanatic about the possibilities of Web use," he
does believe that "It is the responsibility of academics to put things on the
Web that are useful to students and to utilize this medium for proper
historical research and teaching."

>

> However, he cautions, "There is a lot of misinformation on the Web --
unauthorized translations, for example -- and that can encourage poor
research." And while online graphic and auditory materials are useful, he
says, "For a small seminar I'd still prefer to take the class into Firestone
and look at primary sources -- for example, manuscripts of Cruikshank
illustrations. But you can't do that with 55 people."

>

> Faculty members who wish to investigate CourseWare should check out
http://www.princeton.edu/WebFactory. Those wishing to know more about Web
Factory should e-mail place@princeton.edu or phone 258-6073.

>

> A Web Factory "office visit," says Chun, goes a long way toward making
faculty members "comfortable with new technology."

>

> * * *

