Rome F95 Syllabus

## Art 304 Rome, the Eternal City Fall 1994

###  Tu & Th 1:10-2:50 in L 41

#### Minott Kerr L 320, ext. 7883 e-mail: mkerr@reed.edu

#### Office Hours: M 1:00-3:00, Th 3:30-4:30 and by appt.

(C) 1995 Minott Kerr. All rights reserved.

This courses studies the architectural and urban history of the city of Rome
from pre-history to the present. We will focus on selected problems using
physical, pictorial and written evidence from all periods in order to
understand not only the city's buildings and its urban fabric but also what
these meant to patrons and to audiences. Particular attention will be paid to
how Rome's past shaped and has been used to shape the present in different
eras.

### Course Requirements

Completion of assigned readings and active participation in class discussions.
Obviously to accomplish the latter you must attend class. Chronic absence will
result in a significant penalty against your final evaluation in the course.
Twice weekly contribution to "Rome," the Reed College electronic bulletin
board devoted to the city of Rome.

#### Short papers:

  * 1) 3 pp. analysis of the Reed Campus, due 5:00 Friday 9 September 
  * 2) 3 pp. precis of one of the articles from the recommended reading on the Pantheon, due in class the day we discuss the Pantheon, 27 September 
  * 3) I may assign additional 2 pp. papers addressing the reading two or three other times over the course of the semester 

#### Final Paper

(ca. 12 pp. with notes and annotated bibliography) topic to be arranged in
consultation with me. This assignment includes a number of steps (these are in
addition to the short papers above):

  * 1) initial consultation by 5:00 PM, Friday 16 September 
  * 2) one page description of project, problematized into a research issue, with bibliography, due: 5:00 PM, Friday 22 September 
  * 3) three page finalized proposal due: 5:00 PM, Weds. 26 Oct. providing: 
    * a) topic and issue 
    * b) summary of extant treatment of that topic and issue 
    * c) your intended approach 
    * d) annotated bibliography 
  * 4) First Draft due: noon Monday 28 November 
  * 5) Final Draft due: noon Monday 12 December 

#### Exams

* Mid-Term: in class, Thursday 13 October 
* Final Exam: Take Home, Due Thursday 15 December 

#### A Rome scrap book:

documenting whatever sorts of references you find to the Eternal City, in
advertising, movies, newspapers, etc.

#### Unexcused late work will be penalized, and may not receive any written
comments. All work must be completed to pass the course.

### About the reading:

Technically the city of Rome is our syllabus. Anything you do to further your
knowledge of the city will be of great benefit. I strongly urge you to spend
time leafing through the books and articles on reserve and scouting out non-
traditional sources (films, popular press, fiction, etc.). The literature on
Rome is vast and includes the good, the bad and the ugly. Class reading draws
upon many different authors, both because there is no good text covering the
entire subject and to provide different points of view. I ordered only one
book for the course: John Stambaugh, _The Ancient Roman City_. I did so not
because there were no other texts available, but because there are so many.
Only Christopher Hibbert, _Rome: The Biography of a City_ comes close to
covering the entire subject, but it is rather general, at times annoyingly
glib and not by an architectural historian. Hibbert can provide a background
to familiarize us with the sequence of events and major players in Rome's
past. Except for where he discusses the Grand Tour, a subject on which Hibbert
has written a book, be wary of any general statement or evaluation he makes.
The reserve for this course is in the basement of the north wing of the
library. You'll find numerous books and copies of all the readings there.
Please do not remove them from the immediate area. Many books beyond those on
the reading list have been placed, on reserve; again I strongly encourage you
to browse through them. Remember even if a text is in a foreign language its
illustrative material may still be helpful. Many of the books we will be using
can be found at Powell's. If you are interested in a particular period or
topic let me know, I can make recommendations.

##  CLASS READINGS AND TOPICS

(Dates are subject to change depending upon our progression over the course of
the semester)

### Tu 30 Aug.) INTRODUCTION I: The Layers of Rome and the Weight of History,
Class Strategy

  * Sigmund Freud, Civilization and Its Discontents (1930): 116-119 (Handout). Further: 
    * Claude Moatti, The Search for Ancient Rome (1993) (Available at Powell's). 

#### Assignment:

Before the next class. Get your unix account and blitzmail logins and
passwords from Chris Lasell in L15. Logon to blitzmail, send a message to Rome
(i.e. type: rome in the "TO:" slot) explaining why you're taking the course
and what you feel you can contribute to it. NB Messages sent to the Rome
address are semi-public in that they will be sent to myself and the other
students in the class. No one else, however, will be able to read them.

### Th 1 Sept.) INTRODUCTION II: Examining Architecture

Please bring ruler, pencil, eraser and sheets of blank paper to class

  * Spiro Kostof, A History of Architecture (1985): 3-19. 
  * Leland Roth, Understanding Architecture: 9-22, 45-89 &121-37. 

### Tu 6 Sept.) INTRODUCTION III: Theory in praxis, The Reed Campus as City

  * Stambaugh: 1-4. 
  * Spiro Kostof, The City Shaped (1991): 9-41. 
  * Kevin Lynch, The Image of the City (1960): 1-13 & 46-90. Further: 
    * Lewis Mumford, The Culture of Cities (1938): 3-12. 
    * Michel de Certeau, "Spatial Stories," The Practice of Everyday Life, trans. Steven F. Rendall (1984): 115-30. 
    * Michel de Certeau, "Practices of Space," On Signs, ed. Marshall Blonsky (1985): 122-45. Same as The Practice of Everyday Life: 91-114, but with illustrations. 

### Th 8 Sept.) ROMA CONDITA: MYTH & ARCHAEOLOGY, 'NEVER THE TWAIN SHALL
MEET'?

  * Stambaugh, 7-1 5. 
  * Joseph Rykwert, The Idea of the Town: 25-40. 
  * T. J. Cornell, "The Foundation of Rome...," Papers in Italian Archaeology 1 (1978): 131-39. 
  * Livy, The Early History of Rome, transl. A. de Selincourt: 33-45. 
  * Plutarch, Lives, trans. Edmund Fuller, "Romulus": 10-21. 
  * New York Times, 10 June 1988 (handout) Further Reading: 
    * R. Ross Holloway, The Archaeology of Early Rome and Latium (1994). 

### FRIDAY 9 SEPTEMBER FIRST SHORT PAPER (ANALYSIS) DUE 5:00 PM

### Tu 13 Sept.) BUILDING TYPES AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE FORUM

  * Stambaugh: 16-41,101-122,157-68,179-201 and 213-224. 
  * Frank Sear, Roman Architecture (1982): 29-48. 
  * William L. MacDonald, The Architecture of the Roman Empire, Vol. II (1986) 111- 42. Further: 
    * Stambaugh: 89-100,123-56 and 201-12. 
    * L. Richardson, A New Topographical Dictionary of Ancient Rome (1992). In Reference Room 
    * J. B. Ward-Perkins, Roman Imperial Architecture (1982). 
    * S. Platner, The Topography and Monuments of Ancient Rome. 
    * Vitruvius, Ten Books of Architecture, trans. M.H. Morgan (1960): 31-34, 129- 39, 146-66. 

### Th 15 Sept. and Tu 20 Sept.) ROME RE-EDITED: THE SHAPE OF THE AUGUSTAN
CITY

  * Augustus, Res gestae, in its entirety (additional copies in multiple copy stacks). 
  * Stambaugh, 41-66. 
  * Sear, 49-68, 213-219. 
  * J.J. Pollitt, The Art of Rome: Sources and Documents (1966): 99-118. Further: 
    * P. Zanker, The Power of Images in the Age of Augustus 
    * Suetonius, The Twelve Caesars. 

### FRIDAY 16 SEPTEMBER LAST DAY TO MEET WITH ME TO SET UP PAPER TOPIC

### Th 22 Sept.) "BUTCHERED FOR A ROMAN HOLIDAY"

  * Stambaugh: 67-75, 201-206, 225-40. 
  * Sear: 1 34-44. 
  * Keith Hopkins, Death & Renewal, "Murderous Games," 1-30. 
  * Ward-Perkins, Roman Imperial: 67-71. 

### FRIDAY 22 SEPTEMBER ONE-PAGE DESCRIPTION OF FINAL PROJECT DUE 5:00 PM

### Tu 27 Sept) THEPANTHEON SECOND SHORT PAPER (PRECIS) DUE IN CLASS

  * William L. MacDonald, The Pantheon (1976) 11-92. 
  * Robert Mark, Light, Wind and Structure (1990): 51-74 . 
  * Sear: 69-85. 
  * Pollitt: 174-81. Further: (** indicates possible article for second short paper) 
    * Robert Mark and Paul Hutchinson, "On the Structure of the Roman Pantheon," Art Bulletin 68 (1986): 22-34. 
    * William L. MacDonald, "Roman Architecture," Readings in Art History, ed. Spencer: 42-69. 
    * **P. Davies et al. "The Pantheon: Triumph of Rome or Triumph of Compromise," Art History 10 (1987): 133-53. 
    * **P. Godfrey & D. Hemsoll, "The Pantheon: temple or Rotunda?" Pagan Gods and Shrines of the Roman Empire, ed. M. Henig & A. King: 195-209. 
    * **W. Loerke, "A Re-reading of the Interior Elevation of Hadrian's Rotunda," Journal of theSociety of Architectural Historians 49 (1990): 22-43. 

### Th 29 Sept.) CONSTANTINE: THE INVENTION OF THE CHRISTIAN BASILICA & URBAN
TRANSFORMATIONS

  * Richard Krautheimer, Three Christian Capitals: 1-40. 
  * Richard Krautheimer, Early Christian and Byzantine Architecture, 4th edtn: 24- 59\. Further: 
    * Krautheimer, Rome: Profile of a City. 312-1308: 3-31.

### Tu 4 Oct.) THE POPE TAKES COMMAND

  * Hibbert: 64-74. 
  * Krautheimer, Rome: 33-87. Further: 
    * Krautheimer, Three Christian Capitals: 93-121.  

### Th 6 Oct.) MEDIEVAL RENEWALS AND REVIVALS:

  * Hibbert: 74-96. 
  * Krautheimer, Rome: 59-228, esp. 109-42 and 161-202. 
  * Gregory of Tours on the shrine in Old St. Peter's (Handout) 

### Tu 11 Oct.) THE MIDDLE AGES: ROME AS PALIMPSEST

  * Hibbert: 74-96. 
  * Richard Krautheimer, St. Peter's and Medieval Rome (1985): 16-38 
  * John Elsner, "Rome as Palimpsest," Apollo 140:389 (July 1994): 18-22 
  * Michael Camille, The Gothic Idol (1989): 73-87 
  * Bede (Caecilia Davis-Weyer (ed.), Early Medieval Art: Sources & Documents (1971): 72-75). 
  * Hildebert of Lavardin as quoted by William of Malmesbury: (David Thompson (ed.), The Idea of Rome: From Antiquity to the Renaissance (1971): 159-61). 
  * Benedict the Canon: "Marvels of Rome," (E. Holt (ed.), A Documentary History of Art, vol. I (1957): 62-72, and Davis-Weyer: 156-58). 
  * Master Gregory: (Davis-Weyer: 158-62). 
  * Giovanni Villani: Jubilee of 1300 (Thompson: 167-68). Further: 
    * Krautheimer, Rome: 89-228. 
    * Dale Kinney, "Mirabilia urbis Romae," The Classics in the Middle Ages, eds. A. S. Bernardo and S. Levin (1990): 207-221 . 
    * Charles Witke, "Rome as 'Region of Difference' in the Poetry of Hildebert of Lavardin," The Classics in the Middle Ages, eds. A. S. Bernardo and S. Levin (1990): 403-411. 
    * Benedict the Canon, Marvels of Rome, tr. F. M. Nichols (1986): xi-xxviii, 3- 46\. 
    * Master Gregorius, The Marvels of Rome, trans. J. Osborne (1987): 17-36 plus commentary. 

### TH 13 OCT.) MID-TERM EXAM

### FALL BREAK

### Tu 25 OCT.) ROME REBORN: HUMANISM & THE NEW JERUSALEM OF NICHOLAS V

  * Hibbert, 97-124 (Historical Overview) 
  * Charles Burroughs, From Signs to Design (1990): 1-50. 
  * Charles L. Stinger, The Renaissance in Rome (1985): 59-76 
  * Petrarch, "First impression of Rome and Walks in Rome" (Thompson: 170-73). 
  * Antonio Manetti, "Brunellschi in Rome" (Thompson: 174-78). 
  * Raphael: Letter to Leo X (Holt: 289-96). Further: 
    * Overview: Kostof, History: 409-10, and 485-509 
    * Arnaldo Momigliano, "Ancient History and the Antiquarian," Journal of the Warburg & Courtauld Institutes 13 (1950): 285-315. 
    * Stinger, 1-82. 
    * P. Jacks, The Antiquarian and the Myth of Antiquity (1993). 
    * Roberto Weiss, The Renaissance Discovery of Classical Antiquity (1969): 30-104 

### WEDS. 26 OCTOBER THREE-PAGE FINALIZED TOPIC FOR PAPER DUE 5:00 PM

### Th 27 Oct.) NEW ST PETER'S, DECISIONS, DECISIONS: LONGITUDINALLY OR
CENTRALLY PLANNED?

  * Hibbert: 125-62 (Historical Background) 
  * Kostof, History: 500-509 (Overview of the entire Project) 
  * lan Campbell, "The new St Peter's: Basilica or Temple?" Oxford Art J'l 4 (1981): 3-8 
  * James Ackerman: Architecture of Michelangelo, Ch. 8 and entry in Catalogue Further: 
    * Charles McClendon, "The History of the Site of St. Peter's, Rome" Perspecta 25 (1989): 33-65 
    * Ludwig Heydenreich and Wolgang Lotz, Architecture in Italy: 1400-1600: 157-67,173- 77, 198-200 
    * Rudolph Wittkower, Architectural Principles, 3-32 

### Tu 1 Nov.) THE REBUILDING OF ST. PETER'S, Part ll

  * Kostof, History: 505-509 
  * Hibbert, 163-99 (Background) 
  * Hibbard, Howard, Carlo Maderno and Roman Architecture (1971), 65-74 Further: I
    * Irving Lavin, Bernini and the Crossing of St. Peter's (1968), 3-39 (STRONGLY RECOMMENDED) 
    * Heydenreich and Lotz, 263-86 

### Th 3 Nov.) MAKING THE CITY WHOLE: RENAISSANCE AND BAROQUE URBANISM

  * Kostof, History: 485-500 (review) 
  * E. Bacon, The Design of Cities (1976 edtn): 107-161 or (1967 edtn) 93-147 (most of Bacon is plates) 
  * Mark Girouard, Cities and People (1985): 115-36 
  * Krautheimer, Rome of Alexander Vll, 3-7 and 15-36, 63-73 Further: 
    * Ackerman, Michelangelo, Ch 6 

### Tu 8 Nov. ) LA DOLCE VITA: RENAISSANCE VILLAS

  * James Ackerman, The Villa: Form and Ideology of Country Houses (1990): 9-34 
  * Pliny, Letters descrbing his villas at Laurentum and Tusculum 
    * The Letters of the Younger Pliny, Hum 110 Spring Reserve 
    * Bk 2, Letter 6 (to Gallus), pp. 75-79 
    * Bk 5, Letter 6 (to Domitius Apollinaris), 139-44 
  * David Coffin, The Villa in the Life of Renaissance Rome (1979): 9-18, 23-26 and one of the following: 
    * Villa Belvedere: 69-87 
    * Villa Giulia: 150-74 
    * Villa Madama: 245-256 
    * Villa d'Este: 311-40  Further: 
    * David Coffin, Gardens and Gardening in Papal Rome (1991) 
    * Heydenreich and Lotz 

### Th 10 Nov.) BAROQUE PALACES

  * Patricia Waddy, Seventeenth-Century Roman Palaces: The Art of the Plan (1990): 3-69 

### Tu 15 Nov.) THE GRAND TOUR

  * Hibbert: 200-26. 
  * David Solkin, Richard Wilson: The Landscape of Reaction (1982): 37-52 
  * Francis Haskell, and Nicholas Penny, Taste and the Antique (1981): 62-73 

### Th 17 Nov) PLENTIFUL HERE AS ANTS IN AN ANTHILL, AMERICANS IN ROME

  * Hibbert: 227-865 
  * Barbara Novak, "Arcady Revisted," Nature and Culture: American Landscape Painting, 1825- 1875 (1980): 203-225 
  * Henry James, "Last of the Valerii" 
  * *Herman Melville, "Statues in Rome" (1860) photocopy 
  * *Henry James, Daisy Miller (1878) 
  * *SKIM OVER: T. Stebbins, The Lure of Italy, pp. 189-257 (Closed reserve, please handle with care as it is my own copy) Further: 
    * William Vance, America's Rome (2 vols.): esp. I: 43-67 
    * Annabel Patterson (ed.), Roman Images (1984) 

### Tu 22 Nov.) ROMA FASCISTA

  * Hibbert: 286-303 
  * Richard Etlin, Modernism in Italian Architecture: 1890-1940 (1991): 377-438 
  * Diane Ghirado, "From Reality to Myth: Italian Fascist Architecture in Rome," Modulus 21 (1991): 10-33 
  * *Spiro Kostof, The Third Rome, Traffic and Glory (1973): 8-76 Further: 
    * Robert C.Fried, Planning the Eternal City: Roman Politics and Planning Since World War II, 19-40. 
    * Spiro Kostof, "The Emperor and the Duce: The Planning of Piazzale Augusto Imperatore in Rome," Art and Arch. in the Service of Politics, eds. H.A. Millon and L. Nochlin (1978):270-325. 
    * Luigi Lenzi, "The New Rome," The Town Planning Review (May 1931): 145-62. 
    * William L. MacDonald, "Excavation, Restoration and Italian Archit. of the 1930's," In Search of Modern Arch.: A Tribute to Henry-Russell Hitchcock, ed. H. Searing (1982): 298-320. 
    * H.H. Reed, "Rome: The Third Sack," Architectural Review 107 (1950): 91-110. 
    * G. Calza, "The via dell'lmpero and the Imperial Fora," JRIBA 41(1934): 489-509. 
    * Ronald T. Ridley, "Augusti Manes voliant per auras: The Archaeology of Rome under the Fascists," Xenia 11 (1986): 19-46. 

### THANKSGIVING BREAK

### MONDAY 28 NOVEMBER DRAFT OF FINAL PAPER DUE NOON

### Tu 29 Nov ) ROMA FASCISTA II

  * Fred Licht, "American Artists in 20th-Century Italy, The Lure of Italy, 129-45. (Closed reserve & photocopy, please handle with care) 
  * Edith Wharton, "Roman Fever" (1936) 

### Th 1 Dec) THE FOURTH ROME?: PROBLEMS & DILEMMAS OF THE CONTEMPORARY CITY

  * Hibbert: 305-1 1. 
  * Ranuccio Bianchi-Bandinelli, from Moatti: 152-155. 
  * Lisa Ronchi, "Rome from the inside out," The Conservation of European Cities, ed. Donald Appleyard (1979): 138-46. 
  * David Whitehouse, "The Future of Ancient Rome," Antiquity 57:219 (1983): 38- 44\. 
  * Patricia Corbett, "Anarchy on Via Venetto," Connoisseur 215:86 (November 1985): 54-55. 
  * Fried, 41-68. Further: 
    * Roma Interrotta 

### Tu 5 Dec.) CONCLUSIONS

Screening of Peter Greenaway's "The Belly of an Architect"  

  * Sigmund Freud, Civilization and Its Discontents (1930): 16-19. 
  * Aldo Rossi, The Architecture of the City (1982): 21-61. 

### FINAL PAPER DUE NOON MONDAY 12 DECEMBER

### TAKE HOME FINAL EXAM WILL BE AVAILABLE NOON MONDAY 12 DECEMBER, DUE 5:00
PM THURSDAY 15 DECEMBER

*If you haven't been able to read these for the class this material will be covered on the final. 

Back to my list of [ Syllabi](http://www.reed.edu/~mkerr/syllabi/syllabi.html)
available as hypertext.

Send any comments or suggestions to Minott Kerr at:
[mkerr@reed.edu](mailto:mkerr@reed.edu)

