![\[Brown College at Monroe
Hill\]](http://minerva.acc.Virginia.EDU/~monroe/courses/textban3.gif)

[Fall 1996](acad_f96.html) | [Spring 1997](acad_s97.html) | [Fall
1997](acad_f97.html) | Spring 1998 | [Fall 1998](courses_f98.htm) |
[E-mail](mailto:cot@virginia.edu) | [Home](http://www.virginia.edu/~monroe)

## Course Offerings for Spring 1998

  * INST 171: Brown College Film Discussion, True or False? _(See new time below!)_
  * INST 302: Environmental Literature and American Culture: After Walden
  * INST 371: Great Books Seminar, Love and Its Burdens
  * INST 401: Research Tutorial: Notions of Nationhood in the British Isles
  * USEM 171: The Making, Use, & Abuse of Maps
  * Brown College Discussion Sections
  * Consult the [U.Va.Course Offering Directory](http://www.virginia.edu/~regist/oregpage/cod.html)

Enrollment in all courses is **NOT** limited to Brown College residents unless
so noted.  
All courses meet in the [Sally Brown Reading Room](/monroe/reading.html) (the
Brown College Library).  
Direct all course inquiries to [Carl Trindle](mailto:cot@virginia.edu) or call
924-3312.

* * *

### Brown College Discussion

### INST 171: True or False? Mayes on the Documentary

Instructor: [Bernard Mayes](mailto:bdm3g@virginia.edu)

_True or False?_ is a one-credit course in which the following films will be
torn apart by our Magus of the Medium, Bernard Mayes.

  * _Nanook of the North_ , Robert Flaherty (1922)
  * _The Man with a Movie Camera_ , Dziga Vertov (1929)
  * _Man of Aran_ , Robert Flaherty (1934)
  * _Triumph of the Will_ , Leni Riefenstahl (1935)
  * _Night Mail_ , Basil Wright & Harry Watt (1936)
  * _Titicut Follies_ , Frederick Wiseman (1967) 
  * _Roger and Me_ , Michael More (1989)
  * _Harlan County USA_ , Barbara Kopple (1976)
  * _The Times of Harvey Milk_ , Robert Epstein (1986) 
  * _Paris is Burning_ , Jenny Livingston (1990)
  * _Night and Fog_ , Alain Resnais (1950) 

  * Times: Wednesday evenings, 7:30 PM ** NOTE NEW TIME **
  * 1 hour: CR/NC
  * Schedule #71463

![](http://minerva.acc.Virginia.EDU/~monroe/courses/ball1.gif) Return to list
of courses

* * *

### The Sally Brown Seminar: Literature and the Environment

### INST 302: Environmental Literature and American Culture: After Walden

Instructor: [Dan Philippon](mailto:djp2n@virginia.edu), Department of English

(Note: A [course syllabus](http://wsrv.clas.virginia.edu/~djp2n/courses/inst/)
is available.)

**Course Description:** Taking _Walden_ (1854) as the central text of
environmental literature in America, this course will survey the legacy of
Henry David Thoreau as manifest in the literature of the modern conservation
and environmental movements in America. Reading from a diverse group of texts,
we will look closely at the interaction of landscape, literature, and culture,
asking how American writers and the cultures within which they have worked
have both shaped and been shaped by their natural environments. Topics will
include: late Romanticism, women's domestic writing, the rise of ecological
science, the literature of wilderness, contemporary Native American mythology,
magical realism, green theology, deep ecology, and ecofeminism.

This seminar will meet in the Brown College Library, located on the Monroe
Hill range.

Enrollment is limited to 15 people.

**Writers to be studied may include:** Henry David Thoreau, John Burroughs,
John Muir, Mabel Osgood Wright, Mary Austin, Aldo Leopold, Edward Abbey, N.
Scott Momaday, Simon Ortiz, Rudolfo Anaya, Annie Dillard, Sue Hubbell, Gary
Snyder, and Terry Tempest Williams.

**Field Trips and Special Lectures:** Given the richness of our own local
environment, we will pay particular attention to the literary and cultural
history of Virginia and will take field trips to Shenandoah National Park, the
Rivanna Water and Sewer Authority, and/or the Ivy Landfill. We can also expect
class visits from writers Sue Hubbell and Simon Ortiz.

**Requirements:** Attendance and participation, oral presentation, reading
response papers, and a short seminar paper. This seminar is being offered as a
two-credit, credit/no-credit (CR/NC) course. It does not fulfill the second
writing requirement.

  * Time: Tuesdays 3-5 PM
  * 2 hours: CR/NC
  * Schedule #74588

![](http://minerva.acc.Virginia.EDU/~monroe/courses/ball1.gif) Return to list
of courses

* * *

### Great Books Seminar

### INST 371: Love and Its Burdens

Instructor: [Carl Trindle](mailto:cot@virginia.edu)

This semester's installment of the Great Books Seminar turns to readings on
the emotion of love, its discontents and consequence. Readings may well
include

  * _Symposium_ , Plato
  * _Ars Amatoria_ , Ovid
  * Selections from Arthurian Legend
  * _Sonnets_ , Petrarch
  * _The Sorrows of Young Werther_ , J.W. Goethe
  * _On Love_ , Stendahl
  * _Madame Bovary_ , G. Flaubert
  * _The Four Loves_ , C.S. Lewis
  * _A Natural History of Love_ , Diane Ackerman

  * Mondays 3:30-5:30 PM
  * 3 hours: CR/NC
  * Schedule #70381

![](http://minerva.acc.Virginia.EDU/~monroe/courses/ball1.gif) Return to list
of courses

* * *

### Research Tutorial

### INST 401: Notions of Nationhood in the British Isles

Research tutorials bring students into contact with research in progress and
into collaboration with working scholars. J. Krishan Kumar offers students
from any discipline the opportunity to explore with him the notion of English
national identity. He is focused for the time on the apparent upsurge in
"Englishness" in the late 19th and early 20th century, and how that
development contributed to the sense of English nationhood in the rest of the
century.

Students with interests in history, literature, political philosophy and
social thought will find much of value in the shared exploration of Professor
Kumar's ideas and in the task of helping to develop them further.

Interested students should contact Professor Kumar as soon as possible: 536
Cabell Hall, [kk2d@virginia.edu](mailto:kk2d@virginia.edu), or 293-7790.

  * Meetings TBA
  * 3 hours: CR/NC
  * Schedule #73335 _(Instructor's permission required.)_

![](http://minerva.acc.Virginia.EDU/~monroe/courses/ball1.gif) Return to list
of courses

* * *

### University Seminar

### USEM 171: The Making, Use, & Abuse of Maps

Instructor: [Carl Trindle](mailto:cot@virginia.edu)

Readings include _How to Lie With Maps_ (Mark Monmonier), Longitude (Dava
Sorel), and _Mapping the Next Millennium_ (Steven Hall). We'll explore the
collection of maps at Alderman, try our hand at digital cartography, and
deconstruct the propaganda in tourist, real estate, and exploratory maps.

  * Thursdays 3-5 PM
  * 2 hrs: CR/NC
  * Schedule # 71910

![](http://minerva.acc.Virginia.EDU/~monroe/courses/ball1.gif) Return to list
of courses

* * *

### Brown College Discussion Sections

Many Brown College Fellows lead special discussion sections of their own
popular lecture courses, essentially giving students the opportunity to have
the professor as their teaching assistant.

Announcements of such sections for the Spring of 1998 will be forthcoming.

![](http://minerva.acc.Virginia.EDU/~monroe/courses/ball1.gif) Return to list
of courses

* * *

[![\[Home\]](http://minerva.acc.Virginia.EDU/~monroe/courses/jmbutton1.gif)](http://www.virginia.edu/~monroe)
[Return to the Brown College home page](http://www.virginia.edu/~monroe)
[![\[E-mail\]](http://minerva.acc.Virginia.EDU/~monroe/courses/mailbox1.gif)](mailto:flax@virginia.edu)
[E-mail the Brown College Office](mailto:flax@virginia.edu)

