![\[Brown College at Monroe Hill\]](../images/textban3.gif)  

## Course Offerings for Fall 1997

  * INST 170: Monroe Hill Discussion, Films of the Pacific Rim
  * INST 201: U.Va. Backstage
  * INST 301: Environmental Literature and American Culture: Before Walden
  * INST 370: Great Books Seminar, Forbidden Knowledge
  * INST 400: Research Tutorial: Notions of Nationhood in the British Isles![](new2.gif)
  * USEM 171: The Making, Use, & Abuse of Maps   (moved to Spring 1998)
  * Brown College Discussion Sections (HIEU 201, RELG 214, RELG 265)

Enrollment in all courses is **NOT** limited to Brown College residents unless
so noted.  
All courses will meet in the [Sally Brown Reading Room](/monroe/reading.html)
(the Brown College Library).  
Please disregard the room assignments, etc. in the [U.Va. Course Offering
Directory.](http://www.virginia.edu/~regist/oregpage/cod.html)  
Direct all course inquiries to [Carl Trindle](mailto:cot@virginia.edu) or call
924-3312.

[Fall 1996](acad_f96.html) | [Spring 1997](acad_s97.html) | Fall 1997 |
[Spring 1998](acad_s98.htm) | [Home](http://www.virginia.edu/~monroe)

* * *

### Monroe Hill Discussion

### INST 170: Films of the Pacific Rim

Continuing our series of world cinema, we will view films made in China,
Japan, Southeast Asia, the Pacific Islands, and the west coast of North
America. Examples follow; suggestions welcome.

_

  * Tampopo 
  * Farewell My Concubine 
  * Raise the Red Lantern 
  * Dim Sum 
  * The Scent of Green Papaya 
  * M Butterfly 
  * Iron and Silk 
  * Eat Drink Man Woman 
  * Picture Bride 
  * Mishima 
  * Hiroshima mon Amour 
  * Ballad of Narayama 
  * The Joy Luck Club 
_

  * Times: Tuesday evenings, 6:30 PM
  * 1 hour: CR/NC
  * Schedule #64052

![](ball1.gif) Return to list of courses

* * *

### INST 201: U.Va. Backstage

_This course is designed for incoming first-year students who will be
residents of Brown College in the Fall of 1997._

For newcomers to the University, we provide a first acquaintance with the
University's nooks and crannies. We'll see a dress rehearsal for a dramatic
presentation, visit Ash Lawn and Monticello, and hike to Humpback Rock. We'll
explore the University gardens and graveyard, and even find our way downtown.

We'll get to know the Fellows of Brown College, from History, Biology,
English, Physics, and all around grounds. Students active in publications,
governance, and volunteer efforts will let us know how we can join in.

Joanne Mahanes brings the Office of Career Planning and Placement to the Hill.
We'll explore the labyrinthine Alderman Library, with a knowledgeable guide to
bring us back alive. InfoTech shows us how to make our own web pages and how
to use the on-line resources at the University and around the world.

  * Time: Fridays at 1:00 PM and 2:00 PM (2 sections)
  * 1 hour: CR/NC
  * Schedule #63264 (1 PM) or #63897 (2 PM)

![](ball1.gif) Return to list of courses

* * *

### The Sally Brown Seminar on the Environment

### INST 301: Environmental Literature and American Culture: Before Walden

Instructor: [Dan Philippon](mailto:djp2n@virginia.edu), Department of English

(Note: A [course
syllabus](http://faraday.clas.virginia.edu/~djp2n/courses/inst/) is
available.)

Taking _Walden_ (1854) as the central text of environmental literature in
America, this course will explore the long tradition of nature writing that
culminates in the life and work of Henry David Thoreau. Reading from a diverse
group of texts, we will look closely at the interaction of landscape,
literature, and culture, asking how American writers and the cultures within
which they have worked have both shaped and been shaped by their natural
environments.

Topics we will examine include Native American mythology, reports of European
discovery and exploration, nature writing in the colonies and early Republic,
narratives of Western expansion, and the literature and painting of the
Romantic artists. Given the richness of our own local environment, we will pay
particular attention to the literary and cultural history of Virginia and may
augment our reading with visits to Monticello and the Museum of American
Frontier Culture in Staunton.

Enrollment is limited to 15 people.

**Writers to be studied may include:** Columbus, Cabeza de Vaca, John Smith,
John Winthrop, William Wood, Mary Rowlandson, Robert Beverley, William Byrd,
Jonathan Edwards, Crevecoeur, Jefferson, Bartram, Lewis and Clark, Cooper,
Emerson, and Thoreau.

**Requirements:** Attendance and participation, oral presentation, reading
response papers, and a short seminar paper. This seminar does not fulfill the
second writing requirement.

**Companion Course:** A companion course on the literature of the modern
conservation and environmental movements will be offered in Spring 1998.

**Note:** The course information listed in the pre-fall 1997 course offering
directory is in error. This page contains the correct information.

  * Time: Tuesdays 3-5 PM
  * 2 hours: CR/NC
  * Schedule #64508

![](ball1.gif) Return to list of courses

* * *

### Great Books Seminar

### INST 370: Forbidden Knowledge

Our central reading will be Roger Shattuck's recent book _Forbidden
Knowledge_. To deepen our understanding of his work, which succeeds in joining
a deep draught of world literature and its role in his moral judgment, we will
read some of the works central to his argument. These are:

  * The Myth of Prometheus 
  * Adam and Eve; passages from _Genesis_ and _Paradise Lost_
  * Meyrink's _The Golem_
  * Marlowe's _Dr Faustus_ and Goethe's _Faust_
  * Shelley's _Frankenstein_ ; or _The New Prometheus_
  * De Sade, _Justine_ 

  * Mondays 3:30-5:30 PM
  * 3 hours: CR/NC
  * Schedule #61624

![](ball1.gif) Return to list of courses

* * *

### Research Tutorial

### INST 400: Notions of Nationhood in the British Isles

Research tutorials bring students into contact with research in progress and
into collaboration with working scholars. J. Krishan Kumar offers students
from any discipline the opportunity to explore with him the notion of English
national identity. He is focused for the time on the apparent upsurge in
"Englishness" in the late 19th and early 20th century, and how that
development contributed to the sense of English nationhood in the rest of the
century.

Students with interests in history, literature, political philosophy and
social thought will find much of value in the shared exploration of Professor
Kumar's ideas and in the task of helping to develop them further.

Interested students should contact Professor Kumar as soon as possible: 536
Cabell Hall, [kk2d@virginia.edu](mailto:kk2d@virginia.edu), or 293-7790.

  * Meetings TBA
  * 3 hours: CR/NC
  * Schedule #64447

![](ball1.gif) Return to list of courses

* * *

### University Seminar

### USEM 171: The Making, Use, & Abuse of Maps

(moved to Spring 1998)

With maps being the media of expression of the territorial imperative in
Bosnia, it is worth reflection on how seemingly objective representations of
the landscape can actually serve as expressions of human wishes and bias. We
will try our hand at constructing our own maps with the help of cartographic
software, see how maps have been used to express propaganda and prejudice, and
explore the implications of the metaphor of mapping.

Among the materials: Steven S. Hall's _Mapping the Next Millennium_ , Mark
Monmonier's _How to Lie With Maps_ and _Drawing the Line_ ; John Noble
Wilford's _The Mapmakers_ ; various CDROM-based atlases and GIS software.

  * Thursdays 3-5 PM
  * 2 hrs: CR/NC
  * Schedule # TBA

![](ball1.gif) Return to list of courses

* * *

### Brown College Discussion Sections

Many Brown College Fellows lead special discussion sections of their own
popular lecture courses, essentially giving students the opportunity to have
the professor as their teaching assistant. This fall semester, sections will
be organized by [Ben Ray](mailto:bcr@virginia.edu) (RELG 214 Archaic Cult &
Myth), [Thomas Noble](mailto:tfn@virginia.edu) (HIEU 201 Western
Civilization), and [James Childress](mailto:jfc7c@virginia.edu) (RELG 265
Theology, Ethics & Medicine). Interested Brown College students who plan to
take any of these courses should contact the professor at the beginning of the
semester so that sections can be scheduled for maximum convenience.

![](ball1.gif) Return to list of courses

* * *

[![\[Home\]](jmbutton1.gif)](http://www.virginia.edu/~monroe)  [ Return to the
Brown College home page](http://www.virginia.edu/~monroe)
[![\[E-mail\]](mailbox1.gif)](mailto:flax@virginia.edu)  [ E-mail the Brown
College Office](mailto:flax@virginia.edu)

