**HISTORY 355 - GEORGIAN BRITAIN, 1714-1837**

Gordon  
Fall Semester 2000

_Prospectus_ : History 355 offers a topical approach to the study of British
society during the "long eighteenth century," from the beginnings of the
Hanoverian dynasty with George I in 1714 to the accession of Queen Victoria in
1837. It will examine, through readings, lectures, discussions and film, the
characteristics and evolution of the social order, economy, institutions,
culture, constitution, political system, and international position of Great
Britain in this period. The establishment of the Whig oligarchy, the Anglo-
French rivalry, far reaching agricultural and industrial developments, and the
reform of Parliament and other institutions are some themes to be explored. In
addition to its coverage of Britain in the Georgian era, the course will
provide students an opportunity to learn about the nature of historical
inquiry as well as to enhance reading, critical thinking, and writing skills.

_Required Materials_ : The six paperbacks listed below are on order at the
University Bookstore in the Tyler Haynes Commons. They total approximately
1425 pages of reading.

Speck, William A. _Stability and Strife: England, 1714-1760_. Vol. 6,  "The
New  
          History of England." Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1979.  
Hill, Bridget. _Women, Work and Sexual Politics in Eighteenth-Century
England._  
          Montreal and Kingston: McGill-Queen's University Press, 1994.  
Schwartz, Richard B. _Daily Life in Johnson's London_. Madison: University of  
          Wisconsin Press, 1983.  
Ashton, Thomas S. _The Industrial Revolution, 1760-1830_. Revised ed. Oxford:  
          Oxford University Press, 1997.  
Dickinson, Harry T. _The Politics of the People in Eighteenth-Century
Britain_.  
          New York: St. Martin's Press, 1994.

Selected articles and short assignments will be furnished by the instructor or
made available on reserve in Boatwright Library.

_Required Project_ : See separate handout for instructions.

_Essays and Testing_ :   The major writing assignment for the course will
consist of critiques of at least three of the required books and mid-term and
final examinations. The critiques should be concise (3-5 pages) and
analytical, explaining the book's scope and character, the author's major
thesis or theses, and the book's value to you as a student of Georgian
Britain. The deadlines for the critiques are specified in the syllabus. The
mid-term and final examinations will be take-home in format, consisting of
essays designed to test critical and analytical understanding of the course's
material more than factual information. Careful attention should be given to
grammar, syntax, and spelling in all written work for the course. Those
experiencing writing difficulties will be referred to the Writing Center for
assistance.

_Honor System_ :   Students are expected to abide by the Honor Code on all
graded assignments. Each piece of written work must include the honor pledge
and student's signature. The pledge is, "I have neither given nor received
unauthorized assistance during the completion of this work."  
  
_Grade Computation_ :   The semester grade will be computed as follows: 20
percent for the book critiques, 15 percent for the required project, 20
percent for the mid-term, 25 percent for the final examination, and 20 percent
for class work, including oral participation, quizzes, and short writing
assignments.

_Films_ :   Film can be an interesting, effective, and powerful medium to
consider historical players, events, themes, and issues. Students will be
expected to see at least three feature films outside class. A prospectus will
be provided for each of the outside class films. Students should expect to
write short critiques or have quizzes on some or all outside class films.  
  
_Class Attendance Policy_ :   The Arts and Sciences faculty has adopted the
following attendance policy:  
     Each student is expected to attend all meetings of all classes and laboratory periods in courses in which he or she is enrolled. However, the specific attendance policy in each course of study is to be determined by the instructor in the course. The specific attendance policy for each course will be announced and distributed to the students at the beginning of the course....   
     A student may be held responsible for the work of the class or laboratory missed during an absence.... Missed classes, work, or tests may result in a poorer grade, or failure, in the course....   
Since I will make every effort to assure that worthwhile learning activities
occur during class meetings of History 355, it is my expectation that serious
students will attend all meetings of the course except when prevented by
emergency from doing so. As noted above, class attendance is a factor in
determining the course grade. Obviously, if one is not present one cannot
score points on participation. I will check attendance regularly and, thus,
will be aware of the attendance habits of each students.

I will honor official requests from the Dean of the student's college to
excuse a student for participation in a University sponsored event such as
off-campus choral performances, intercollegiate athletic events, and judicial
hearings at which a student must be present. I will deal with student requests
for unofficial absences on a case by case basis. Requests based on emergencies
such as a death in one's family or illness will be respected. In general,
other non-emergency requests will be considered more sympathetically if they
are made in advance of the absence. Each student, of course, is responsible
for the work of the class during an absence.  
_Individual Conferences_ : I look forward to meeting and talking individually
with each of you during the semester. My office is located in Ryland Hall 219.
Scheduled office hours are:

M. 2:40-3:30  
Tu. 11:15-12:30  
W. 11:15-12:00  
Th. 11:15-12:30 and 2:15-3:30

I will be pleased to meet with you at other times by appointment. To arrange
an appointment, see me before or after class, or telephone 289-8341 (office)
or 288-3508 (home). You also may communicate with me by e-mail
(jgordon@richmond.edu).  



### SYLLABUS

**Part I: Social, Economic, Institutional, and Cultural History**

August 29                  Topic:      Introductions to Course and Georgian
Britain  
  
August 31                  Topic:      The British Isles

September 5              Topic:      Demography  
**MAP QUIZ**

September 7 & 12     Topic:      The Social Structure  
                                                 Reading: W. A. Speck, _Stability and Strife: England,                                                  1714-1760_, pp. 31-90

September 14            Topic:      The Status of Women  
                                                 Bridget Hill, _Women, Work and Sexual Politics in  
                                                 Eighteenth-Century England_, entire book, pp. vii-viii,  
                                                 1-267  
  
September 19           Topic:        Agriculture and Rural England  
                                 **HILL CRITIQUE DUE**

September 21           Topic:         London and the Towns  
                                Reading:      Richard B. Schwartz, _Daily Life in Johnson's London_ ,   
                                                   entire book, pp. xi-xx, 3-178   
  
September 26          Topics:        The Historiography of the Industrial
Revolution;  
                                                  Manufacture and Trade in Pre-Industrial England  
                               Reading:      Pat Hudson, Preface to Thomas S. Ashton, _The Industrial  
                                                 Revolution, 1760-1830_, pp. v-xiv; Ashton, pp. 1-47;  
                                                 Speck, pp. 120-142

September 28         Topics:        Technology and the Growth of Industry; The
Social  
                                                 Consequences of the Rise of Industry  
                               Reading:     Ashton, pp. 48-129

October 3               Topic:         Crime, Punishment, and the Law  
**ASHTON CRITIQUE DUE**

October 5               Topic:          The Church of England and Its Rivals  
                               Reading:      Speck, pp. 91-119

October 10             Topic:          Education and Letters  
                               Films:           _Tom Jones_ , screenings to be announced  
                                                   _Sense and Sensibility_ , screenings to be announced

October 12             Topic:          Architecture, Decoration, and Gardens  
                                **ESSAY ON FILMS DUE**

October 17              FALL BREAK

October 19              Topic:         Painting and Engraving  
  
**MID-TERM EXAMINATION**

**Part II: Constitutional, Governmental, Political, and Diplomatic History**

October 24              Topics:        The Georgian Constitution and
Establishment of the  
                                                   Hanoverian Dynasty and Whig Supremacy  
                                Reading:      Speck, pp. 1-30, 142-184

October 26              Topic:          The Age of Walpole, 1714-42  
                                Reading:      Speck, pp. 185-238

October 31              Topic:          The Era of the Pelhams and the Elder
Pitt, 1742-60  
                                Reading:      Speck, pp. 239-274

November 2             Topic:          George III and the Historians;  
                                                    George III and the Politicians, 1760-75  
                                Reading:        L.G. Mitchell, _Charles James Fox_ , pp. 1-45

November 7             Topic:           George III and the American Problem,
1765-83

November 9             CLASS WILL NOT MEET  
                                Film:               _The Madness of King George_ , screenings to be announced

  
November 14          Topic:             The Political Crises of the 1800s  
                               Reading:          Mitchell, pp. 46-107

November 16          Topic:             Britain in the Era of the French
Revolution, 1789-1799  
                               Reading:         Mitchell, pp. 108-193

November 21          Topic:             Britain in the Napoleonic Era,
1799-1815  
                               Reading:          Mitchell, pp. 195-266

November 23          THANKSGIVING BREAK

November 28          Topic:             Ireland and the Anglo-Irish
Relationship  
                                **MITCHELL CRITIQUE DUE**

November 30         Topic:              Popular Politics in Georgian Britain  
                              Reading:          H.T. Dickinson, _The Politics of the People in  
                                                    Eighteenth-Century Britain_, entire book, pp. ix-x, 1-286

December 5 & 7    Topic:              Politics and Reform in the Later
Georgian Era, 1815-1837  
                               **SUPPLEMENTARY PROJECTS DUE DECEMBER 5**

December 15 (Friday)            **FINAL EXAMINATION PERIOD, 2:00-5:00 p.m.  
**

[Return to Gordon's Homepage](index.html)

