|  ![](stpl_bnl.gif) |  Syllabus |  ![](stpl_bnl.gif)  
---|---|---  
  
[![](stpl_smb.gif)Home](http://clem.mscd.edu/~holtzee/)  
![](stpl_smb.gif)[Welcome](Welcome.htm)  
![](stpl_smb.gif)**Syllabus**  
![](stpl_smb.gif)[Web Resources  
](webresources.htm)

|

ENG 3020: History of the English Language

Spring 2000

Professor: Elizabeth Holtze, Ph.D. Telephone: 556-4942  
Office hours: TR 11:30-12:30, W 1:00-2:00 Office: CN 211M or by appointment  
Mailbox: CN 211

If you wish to contact me, please leave a note in my mailbox in 211 or call my
office (556-4942). Please do not call the overworked departmental office
staff.

Texts:

Millward, C.M. _A Biography of the English Language_. 2d ed.

Fort Worth: Harcourt, 1996.

\---. Workbook. 2d ed., 1996.

**Readings:**

** |

Jan. 18 Introduction  
Jan. 20 Ch. 1

Jan. 25 Ch. 2  
Jan. 27 " "

Feb. 1 Ch. 3  
Feb. 3 " "

Feb. 8 Test #1  
Feb. 10 Ch. 4

Feb. 15 " "  
Feb. 17 Paper #1: Sound Shifts

Feb. 22 Ch. 4  
Feb. 24 Ch. 5

Feb. 29 " "  
Mar. 2 " "

Mar. 7 " "  
Mar. 9 " "

|

Mar. 14 Test #2  
Mar. 16 Ch. 6

Mar. 21 Spring Break  
Mar. 23 Spring Break

     
Mar. 28 Ch. 6  
Mar. 30 Paper #2: Biography

Apr. 4 Ch. 6  
Apr. 6 Ch. 7

Apr. 11 " "  
Apr. 13 Paper #3: OED, etc.

Apr. 18 " "  
Apr. 20 Test #3

Apr, 25 Ch. 8  
Apr. 27 " "

May 2 Ch. 9  
May 4 " "

May 9 or 11 Test #4 (Finals)  
  
---|---  
**

All chapter numbers refer to Millward's text. Individual assignments in the
accompanying workbook, with reprints, and/or online will supplement the text.

Course description:

This class will explore the chronological development of the phonology,
grammar, and semantics of English (internal history) and the political,
social, and cultural events (external history) that influenced masses of
speakers to change these phonological, grammatical, and semantic features. How
this class specifically differs from others in the English Department is most
succinctly explained in this quotation from the departmental syllabus,
January, 1986, update:

History of the English Language is the most "traditional" of the courses in
English Language and Linguistics. Though the content of the course does not
exclude consideration of any other language, such information appears
virtually exclusively with the purpose of illuminating the development of a
single language. This fact contrasts the content of the course dramatically
with the content of The Nature of Language. In consideration of syntax,
English 302--unlike English Grammar and Modern English Language Studies--
considers the actual structures in English at different periods in its history
rather than using the structures of English primarily to arrive at meta-
theoretical and theoretical postures about structure in natural language.
Though the course does include a study of morphology--as does Semantics--the
emphasis in History is on historical developments rather than on the
phenomenon of transfer of meaning in natural language as such. Unlike English
107 (English Usage and Grammar, which attempts to describe contemporary usage,
History of the English Language shows not only how such practices have changed
over the years but also reveals why it is a fallacy to believe that such
practices should not have changed. Finally, unlike the several specific topics
available under the course Studies in Linguistics, English 302 simply
introduces some of these approaches to the study of English.

Course Objectives:

1\. with respect to attitudes about human language, especially English, the
class will

1.1 cultivate the notion that change in language is an inevitable phenomenon
and not evidence of degeneration;

1.2 cultivate an appreciation of the interaction between the characteristics
of English as a language and the great literature written in English during
various periods and in various locales;

1.3 cultivate an appreciation of natural language--through the study of
English--as a dynamic, universal, exclusively human phenomenon.

2\. with respect to performance abilities, students who successfully complete
the course will

2.1 understand, identify, and state principal characteristics of language, of
humans as the "language animal;" identify interrelationships between and among
language, nation, and culture;

2.2 understand and identify differences among characteristics of vocabulary,
phonology, morphology, and syntax in English;

2.3 identify, according to specific characteristics of English examined in the
course, language from the various historical periods of English;

2.4 differentiate between and among different types of studies utilized in
careful, explicit, and precise examinations of English;

2.5 recognize, identify, and analyze selected lexical, phonological,
morphological, and syntactic characteristics of English from various
historical periods;

2.6 recognize, identify, and comment on (compare, contrast, evaluate) selected
methodologies and practices in English language study;

2.7 recognize, identify, and comment on (compare, contrast, evaluate) selected
historical patterns, geographic "migrations," influences of and on the English
language.

3\. with respect to conceptual knowledge, students who successfully complete
the course will exhibit familiarity with and understanding of

3.1 characteristics of human language as language; how language and culture
interact; the relationship between/among nation and language; the variety of
language;

3.2 the differences between and among the significance of vocabulary,
phonology, morphology, and syntax of language, especially English;

3.3 the origin of, principal characteristics of, and influences on Old
English;

3.4 the origin of, principal characteristics of, and influences on Middle
English;

3.5 the origin of, principal characteristics of, and influences on Modern
English;

3.6 the dispersion of English and effects of that dispersion from the British
Isles;

3.7 the importance of recent developments in language study and language
theory and practice.

Examinations:

There will be four, at roughly equal intervals. These exams will be
comprehensive, designed to demonstrate the range and depth of your knowledge.
They may be in-class or take-home exams or combinations thereof.

Grading:

Your grade will be determined by your performance on the four exams, your
three papers, and (in borderline cases) participation in class discussion
using the following scale:

Exam 1: 75 points

Exam 2: 150 points

Exam 3: 150 points

Exam 4: 75 points

Papers: 150 points (50 points each)

Letter grades will be determined on a 10% scale, i.e., if you earn 540 or more
points from the 600 possible, you will earn an "A" in this course.

Attendance:

Since this is an upper-division course, I expect each of you to attend
regularly without the incentive of either carrots or sticks. Please note that
students who do not attend regularly rarely do well on exams; please note,
too, that there may be unannounced quizzes, which if they occur will be
counted as part of an exam.

I adhere to the MSCD policy that respects absences for religious observances.
If you have not received a copy of this policy, please see me.

I am also eager to accommodate students with special needs. Note the following
school policy:

"Students desiring a reasonable accommodation under the Americans with
Disabilities Act must contact the instructor immediately to discuss their
needs. Failure to notify the instructor, in a timely manner, of the need for a
reasonable accommodation may hinder the college's ability to assist the
students in successfully completing the course."

Please see me about these, or other subjects of concern, as early as possible
in the semester.

NC/NCI Policy:

Please note the following dates:

February 14: Last day to withdraw and receive "NC," faculty

signature not required.

April 7: Last day to withdraw and receive "NC," faculty

signature required (and completed forms in registration office by 5:00 p.m.)

A student who wishes an "NC" after 2/14 and before 4/7 should see me. I cannot
imagine denying such a considered request. However, a student who simply
disappears will earn a grade of "F" rather than "NC."

College grading policy allows instructors to grant a grade of "NCI" in
exceptional circumstances. For both pedagogical and practical reasons, I will
resist granting such a grade in all but the most compelling circumstances.
Students whose situation warrants an "NCI" will sign a contract that includes
the work needing to be completed and the anticipated date of completion. Under
the new college policies, any "NCI" grade automatically becomes an "F" at the
end of one year. Refer to Student Handbook for further elaboration.

Papers:

Three papers are required. The three will be alike in their formal,
researched, edited presentation but very diverse in subject. Each of the
papers should

* Begin with a clear thesis and develop it to a clear conclusion.

* Use at least three sources.

* Be at least three but no more than four pages in length.

Paper #1: Consonant Shifts.

Recent linguistic research presents a challenge to Grimm's Law. Explain what
the new theory is, what evidence supports it, what else in our worldview
changes if we accept the new theory, and what your opinion of the controversy
is. Begin your review of the subject with the article,"The Early History of
Indo-European Languages,"
<www.geocities.com/Paris/LeftBank/6507/chronicle120.html>

Due: February 17

Paper #2: Biography.

Many famous persons have influenced the direction of the English language.
Summarize the linguistic contributions of one of the individuals listed below:

Sir William Jones, Noah Webster

King Alfred, Jacob Grimm

J.A.H. Murray, Robert Lowth

William Caxton, Samuel Johnson

Due: March 30

Paper #3: OED etc.

Write a diachronic history of the word _gospel_. Begin with its first recorded
use in English. In addition to whatever other sources you may use, cite the
OED and at least two additional dictionaries.

Due: April 13

Please begin your research early. All libraries have limited resources.
Although you may be surprised at how much Auraria does have, you will also
want to visit the libraries of DU, CU, and DPL, take advantage of online "card
catalogs," consult resources such as the MLA online bibliography, and, of
course, the Web. Do not, please, forget about interlibrary loan (and do not
forget that it takes time).

Each finished paper should be typed, using the internal documentation system
and bibliographical form recommended by Gibaldi's MLA Handbook for Writers of
Research Papers, 5th ed. (1999). If you have concerns about academic research
or the standards for documentation, you may wish to order a copy of Strategies
for Literary Reading, Writing, and Research by Carlson, Chapman, Griffin, and
Prosenjak (August 1999) through the Auraria Bookstore or consult the Web site
<http://clem.mscd.edu/~english/litguide> Plagiarism is the eighth--and only
academic--deadly sin.

Rubric for papers:

form 15 points

[See paragraph, above, that specifies MLA format for typed work and internal
documentation. Also included here are matters of grammar and mechanics.]

content 35 points

[How accurate, how complete, how professional is the coverage.]

In other words, have something to say and say it gracefully.

Plagiarism:

MSCD's Student Handbook has clear and strong statements about what plagiarism
is and how serious it is (see 85ff). Whether advertent or inadvertent,
plagiarism compromises the academic integrity of a student's work. I would not
hesitate to give a grade of "F" to a student whose work was blatantly
plagiarized.  
  
 ![](stpl_bar.gif)



 [**Home**](http://clem.mscd.edu/~holtzee/) **** | [Welcome](Welcome.htm) |
**3020 Syllabus** | [3020 Web Resources](webresources.htm)



 Elizabeth Holtze, Ph.D.  
[holtzee@mscd.edu](mailto:holtzee@mscd.edu)  
Date Last Modified: 1/19/00  

