### History 503.01  
THE ROMAN REPUBLIC



**Class texts**

The following books are available for purchase at SBX.

Required:

  1. Cicero, _Selected Political Speeches_ , Penguin 
  2. _ibid_., _Selected Letters_ , Penguin 
  3. Livy, _The Early History of Rome_ , Penguin 
  4. Plautus, _The Pot of Gold and Other Plays_ , Penguin 
  5. Plutarch, _Makers of Rome_ , Penguin 
  6. _ibid_., _The Fall of the Roman Republic_ , Penguin 
  7. Polybius, _The Rise of the Roman Empire_ , Penguin 
  8. Sallust, _The Jugurthine War and the Conspiracy of Catiline_ , Penguin 
  9. _Readings_ (A Xeroxed Packet) 



Recommended:

  1. Cary, M. & H.H. Scullard, _A History of Rome_ , 3rd ed., St. Martin's 

Copies of the assigned readings may also be found on closed reserve at the
undergraduate library.



**Requirements** : Undergraduate students in this course will be required to
take a midterm and a final exam and to turn in a term paper, all of which must
be completed in order to pass the class. Graduate students enrolled in the
course must take the midterm and final exam but will be graded according to a
more rigorous standard. In addition, graduate students will be expected to
write a more ambitious research paper for the course. A student's grade will
be determined as follows: the midterm exam will count for twenty percent of
the final grade; the term paper for forty percent; and the final exam will
comprise the remaining forty percent.



**Objectives** : This course offers an advanced survey of Roman history during
the Republican era, c.753-44 B.C., from a variety of perspectives: political,
social, diplomatic, economic, and intellectual. In addition, students will be
introduced to some of the basic problems which historians of the period are
currently attempting to solve as well as to some of the most important
hypotheses their work has produced. In the process, students will become
acquainted with certain of the principal research tools and techniques which
ancient historians have developed to aid them in their investigations.



**Schedule of Lectures**

**First Week**

.Introduction: Italians, Greeks, and Etruscans

Reading:

Cary and Scullard, A History of Rome, pp. 3-28

.Earliest Rome

Reading:

Cary and Scullard, A History of Rome, pp. 31-61

Livy, The Early History of Rome, Book I (complete)

Xerox Packet, pp. 1-7

**Second Week**

.From Monarchy to Republic

Reading:

Livy, The Early History of Rome Book II, chs. 1-21

Polybius, The Rise of the Roman Empire, Book III, ch. 22

Xerox Packet, pp. 11-16

.The Struggle of the Orders

Reading:

Cary and Scullard, 62-69, 75-83

Livy, II 22-32; III 32-59

Xerox Packet, pp. 17-30 (= Livy, VI 34-37; 42)

.The Conquest of Latium

Reading:

Cary and Scullard, 70-74, 84-94, 99-107

Polybius, III 22, 24

Livy, III 25-29; V (complete);

Xerox Packet, pp. 31-38 (= Livy, VIII 13-14; Cicero, Pro Balbo 53; Diony. Hal.
VI 95)

**Third Week**

.First Steps to World Power

Reading:

Cary and Scullard, 94-96, 113-122

Polybius, I 1-16, 55-64; III 22-26

Xerox Packet, pp. 39-66 (= Plutarch, "Pyrrhus" 9; 13-26.2)

.The War with Hannibal: Part I

Reading:

Cary and Scullard, 124-137

Polybius, II 1, 13, 24, 36; III 1-17, 20-21, 27-35, 77-118, VI 58; VII 9; VIII
3-7, 24-34; IX 3-7; X 6-16; XI 1-13

.The War with Hannibal: Conclusion; Rome and the Greeks: Part I

Reading:

Cary and Scullard, 123, 150-168

Polybius, II 2-12; III 16, 18-19

**Fourth Week**

.Rome and the Greeks: Conclusion

Reading:

Polybius, XVIII 1-12, 44-46, XXIV 11-13; XXXI 11-15

.Rome and the Western Mediterranean

Reading:

Cary and Scullard, 138-149

.The Consequences of Empire

Reading:

Cary and Scullard, 169-176, 186-193

**Fifth Week**

.The Roman Constitution

Reading:

Cary and Scullard, 79-83, 97-99

Polybius, VI 2-18, 43-58

.Politics at Rome

Reading:

Cary and Scullard, 177-185

Plutarch, "Cato the Elder"

.Society and Literature in the Middle Republic

Reading:

Cary and Scullard, 194-198

Plautus, The Brothers Menaechmus, The Swaggering Solder, Pseudolus

**Sixth Week**

.MIDTERM EXAM

.Tiberius Gracchus

Reading:

Cary and Scullard, 203-206

Plutarch, "Tiberius Gracchus"

Xerox Packet, pp. 67-82 (= Appian, Civil Wars 1-17)

.Caius Gracchus

Reading:

Cary and Scullard, 206-211

Plutarch, "Caius Gracchus"

Xerox Packet, pp. 82-91 (= Appian, Civil Wars 18-26)

**Seventh Week**

TERM PAPER DUE IN TWO WEEKS

.Crisis at the Century's Close

Reading:

Cary and Scullard, 212-221

Plutarch, "Marius", chs. 1-31.

Xerox Packet, pp. 92-98 (= Appian, Civil Wars 27-33)

.The Alliance Crumbles; The Republic ~Falters

Reading:

Cary and Scullard, 222-229

Plutarch, "Marius", chs. 32-46

ibid. "Sulla", chs. 1-10

Xerox Packet, pp. 98-131 (= Appian, Civil Wars 34-71)

.Calamity

Reading:

Cary and Scullard, 230-238

Plutarch, "Sulla", chs. 11-37

Xerox Packet, pp. 130-165 (= Appian, Civil Wars 71-107)

**Eighth Week**

TERM PAPER DUE NEXT WEEK

.Veterans Day: No Class

.Recovery

Reading:

Cary and Scullard, 239-244

Plutarch, "Sulla", ch. 38

Xerox Packet, pp. 165-178 (= Appian, Civil Wars 108-121)

.The Ascendency of Pompey

Reading:

Cary and Scullard, 250-255

Cicero, Selected Letters nos. 8-12

Xerox Packet, pp. 179-200 (= Cicero, Letters to Atticus nos. 17, 19, 21, 23)

**Ninth Week**

.Catiline and Cicero; TERM PAPER DUE TODAY

Reading:

Cary and Scullard, 244-248

Cicero, "Against Catiline" I, II, IV

Sallust, The Conspiracy of Catiline

.The First Triumvirate

Reading:

Cary and Scullard, 248-49, 265-66, 255-256

Cicero, Letters nos. 12, 14-16, 21-22, 28

Xerox Packet, pp. 201-231 (= Letters to Atticus. nos 27, 38, 40, 52, 60, 68 )

.Rome and the Provinces

Reading:

Cary and Scullard, 258-265

Cicero, Letters nos. 50

Xerox Packet, pp. 233-266 (= Letters to Atticus nos. 104, 114-117

**Tenth Week**

.Private Life and the Family in the Late Republic

Reading:

Xerox Packet, pp. 323-330

.Literature in the Late Republic

Reading:

Cary and Scullard, 304-312

Plutarch, "Cicero"

Catullus, The Poems of Catullus, nos. 1-62, 83, 85-86, 93

.Thanksgiving Recess; No Class

**Eleventh Week**

.The Shadow of Civil War

Reading:

Cary and Scullard, 266-269

Cicero, Letters nos. 59, 60

Xerox Packet, pp. 233-235, 267-287 (= Letters to Atticus 104, 122, 124,
126-128, 130, 132)

.Caesar the Dictator

Reading:

Cary and Scullard, 270-282

Cicero, Letters nos. 64, 66, 67, 69, 70, 71,

Xerox Packet, pp. 289-321 (= Letters to Atticus 134-135, 139, 144-146, 158,
161, 165A, 171, 174, 199, 199B, 217)

.Decline and Fall?

