Jeffrey Alan Johnson |

[Home](../index.html) [Courses](index.html) [Research](../research/index.html)
[Me](../me/index.html) [PoliSci](http://www.polisci.wisc.edu/)  
  
---|---  
  
* * *



### **Political Science** **80  
 Justice and Power: An Introduction  
to Political Thought  
**

**Spring 2002**

Jeffrey Alan Johnson  
MWF 10:00-10:50

|

449 Wehr Physics Building  
(414) 288-3594  
[jajohnson@polisci.wisc.edu](mailto:jajohnson@polisci.wisc.edu)

|

Office Hours:  
MWF 3:00 - 5:00  
Or by appointment  
---|---  
  
The task of this course is to introduce the task of thinking philosophically
about political things. In Plato's Apology, Socrates famously observes, "The
unexamined life is not worth living." That will be the motto for this course.
We will examine the basic beliefs that contemporary society holds about
politics. By this we do not simply mean politics as it is empirically (that
is, as a matter of fact), but politics as it is normatively (that is, as a
matter of values or ethics) as well. Our aim is to be critical: we wish to see
how the conventional wisdom or our time-ideas like "We hold these truths to be
self evident . . . ," "One nation, under God, with liberty and justice for
all," "Government of the people, by the people, and for the people"-reflects
not the truth about politics but merely the prejudices of our particular
society. We wish to see where our own ideas about politics are wrong. In the
process, we will also see where they are right.

This means challenging every received idea that you hold about politics.
Virtually all of these ideas are rooted in liberalism, the dominant political
theory of the past three centuries of Western civilization. You don't need to
be taught liberalism: you live it every day and know it as simply the way the
world is. Political debate, especially since the collapse of the Soviet Union,
takes place within the basic principles of liberal political thought: the
primacy of the individual, the equality and freedom of all people, government
by consent, rule of law. Contemporary "conservatives," "moderates," and
"liberals" merely debate different interpretations of these fundamental
principles. Liberalism is what the Italian philosopher Antonio Gramsci called
a hegemonic ideology: a set of ideas in relation to which all political
activity of an age is defined. Even if you are not a liberal in this
philosophical sense, your political ideas are shaped as a response to
liberalism.

The task of political philosophy is to unmask this, to show that the world is
built by liberalism and not that liberalism is built by the world. We seek not
necessarily to show that liberalism is wrong, but to critically examine
politics by asking where liberalism might be wrong. In ancient Athens,
Socrates did this by going around asking questions, trying to rouse the
Athenians from their sleep and encourage them to care for truth and virtue; he
was the gadfly of Athenian politics. We will do this by exploring a series of
important texts in the history of political thought, using them as Socratic
gadflies. These readings and our discussions will challenge the hegemony of
liberalism just as Socrates challenged the prevailing ideas of his time,
leading us not to reject liberalism but to question it. We will, in this
course, live the examined life. We will learn to be political philosophers.

**Course Requirements.** This course requires much work. Philosophy requires
much reading, more discussion, and above all writing. All of this will
contribute to your grade. The course will require four papers of varying
length:

  1. **Introductory Essay.** In an essay of approximately 750-1,000 words, answer the question listed on the syllabus below. It is due the first class meeting of the third week. This is worth 10% of your course grade.
  2. **Application Essay.** During the part II of the course, write an essay of approximately 1,250 to 1,500 words applying one political theorist to contemporary society. Pick some aspect of contemporary political life. What would that theorist say about it? It is due one week from when we finish the theorist that you are writing about. This is worth 25% of your grade.
  3. **Critical Essay.** During the part III of the course, write an essay of approximately 1,250 to 1,500 words critically examining one theorist. Where is the theory right and wrong? It is due one week from when we finish the theorist that you are writing about. This is worth 25% of your grade.
  4. **Final Essay.** In an essay of approximately 1,500 to 2,000 words, answer the question listed on the syllabus below. It is due at the scheduled meeting for the final exam, which will take place somewhere where we can have a leisurely discussion of each other's papers and other matters over appropriate food and drink. This is worth 40% of your course grade.

For the first three papers, you may revise your paper after grading. Revision
may improve your grade up to one full grade (though nothing is guaranteed).
Please note that because I am at Marquette only for this term, I cannot allow
incomplete grades in this course; all work must be completed by the end of the
term.

**Participation.** In addition, class participation will contribute to your
final grade. This includes attendance and frequency of participation but of
greater importance is the quality of your participation. Participation that
indicates excellent preparation or consideration of the material will be
grounds for improvement in your grades. Participation that indicates a
disregard for reasonable preparation or that is disruptive or disrespectful of
others will be penalized. Note that no one will be penalized simply for not
speaking, though I will consider chronic inattentiveness poor participation.
Also note that asking even dumb questions requires reasonable preparation; do
not hesitate to speak if you have prepared.

**Academic Conduct.** All students are subject to the University's rules
regarding academic misconduct. Generally, they prohibit any action that would
constitute submitting work other than your own or under conditions other than
those allowed by the assignment. If you have questions about whether something
would violate these policies, feel free to talk to me about how to avoid that.
I will pursue violations of these policies vigorously.  

![](../images/courses.jpg)

[Readings](80readings.html)  
[Useful Web Sites](links.html)

[Current Courses](index.html)

