**GMU Classics-370 GREEK AND ROMAN HISTORIANS - SYLLABUS:** _Instructor_ : Dr.
Olga R. Arans (oarans@gmu.edu)  
_Office_ :  Thompson Hall 234-B. **TEXTS** : _Required_ :

  * Herodotus, _The Histories._ Transl. by Au. De Selincourt, Penguin,1954/96.
  * Thucydides, _History of the Peloponnesian War._ Transl. by R. Warner, Penguin, 1954/72.
  * M. Grant, _Greek and Roman Historians. Information and Misinformation._ Routledge, 1995.
  * R. Mellor, Editor. _The Historians of Ancient Rome._ Routledge, 1998

_Recommended_ :

  * Livy, _The Early History of Rome._ Transl. by Au. De Selincourt, Penguin, 1960/71.
  * Tacitus, The Histories. Transl. by K. Wellesley, Penguin, 1966/88.
  * A. Momigliano, _The Classical Foundations of Modern Historiography._ U. of California Press, Berkeley, 1990.

**Aim of the Course:** Classics 370 offers a survey of the historiographic
tradition of   classical Greece and Rome and explores in greater detail the
most important works of ancient historians. By the very nature of its subject,
historiography occupies a borderline position between science and literature:
On one hand, it conveys the real events of the past; on the other hand, -
which is particularly typical of the ancient historiography, \- it treats the
past events as literature, implying its own categories of the narrative
pattern; psychological characterization; the genre conventions; the author's
personal inner agenda, etc. This two-fold nature of historiography creates the
bi-focal approach of the course: the over-all synopsis of classical history,
and the milestone works of classical historians, - both aspects inseparably
intertwined. Accordingly, the lecture-discussions will focus on the following
aspects of classical historiography:

  * Events of the classical past as reflected in historical writings.
  * Individual works and the distinct features of classical historians: style; philosophy; sympathies; cultural/literary stereotypes; political views and moral insights; over-all ideology; practical goals, etc.
    * As the historian's individual personality typically plays a tangible part in his work, we will see sometimes more than one role combined in the persona of the ancient historical writer:
      * Narrator/ record keeper
      * Story-teller/ entertainer
      * Pathologist/ social analyst
      * Partisan/ apologist
      * Witness
      * Judge
      * Confessor
  
Etc.

  * General features of the genre of ancient historiography; its common techniques, conventions, methods of analysis and synthesis; scope and limitations.
  * The ways classical historiographers have conditioned our modern thought and the ways of understanding history.

This course may be taken in partial fulfillment of the University's literature
requirement.

**Format** : Since Classics 370 is an intermediate-level general course,
overviewing the vast spread of data from many epochs, places and cultures
which, combined together, have built the network of the classical world, a
large amount of class time will, of necessity, be devoted to lectures. None
the less important portion of the course will be set apart for discussion,
where the students' participation is expected, encouraged and appreciated.
Students are invited to share their views on ancient history and historians,
as well as point out the parallels from the modern events or perspectives.
Class sessions will occasionally be supplemented by visual data on classical
history.

**Students' Responsibilities** :

  * **Attendance** :  Since Classics 370 is organized on the basis of lectures and in-class discussion (cf. above), there is no substitute for attendance.  For the record, attendance will be taken every class. Both attendance and attention at all classes are essential for successful completion of the course (i.e. any grade above D).
  * **Attentive and considerate class conduct** : Please come to class on time; _do not bring food or drinks_ , and do not socialize in class. Food consumption or talking during a lecture disrupts the class, interferes with your attentiveness and distracts your neighbors.
  * **Preparation and review** : Students' overall assignment is to have read the relevant texts in preparation to the class discussion of the particular author/ work. (See the Course Schedule.) _Going through your readings prior to the day when the topic is covered in class will   allow the lecture/ discussion to make sense_. After a particular topic has been covered, students should go over their class notes and the chapter in the textbook once again, to solidify their knowledge and understanding of the material.  (This is also an excellent preparation for exams and makes "cramming" unnecessary.)  Students are responsible for all materials dealt with in class and for the readings assigned.
  * **Taking tests** : There will be three intermediate (non-cumulative) tests of 30 minutes each and the Final exam (cumulative test). All tests have to be taken at their scheduled times. Students with learning disabilities who want to take exams at the Disabilities Support Service Office must provide me with a copy of the Faculty Contact Sheet, available from Disability Support Services, by the end of the second week of the semester, and with the Test Form no later than five working days before an exam.
  * **Term paper** : A term paper on the topics of student's choice, 2-3 pages long, is to be submitted by the last week of the course. General requirements for the term paper:
    * Paper must have the title; the name of its author; an indication of the course and date.
    * Pages must be numbered.
    * Minimum three bibliographic entrees must accompany the discussion.
    * Type your bibliography on the last page of your paper. Suggested bibliography format:
      * Give the alphabetical list of the quoted classical authors first. (Author; Work; Translator; Editor; Year.)
      * Give the alphabetical list of the quoted modern authors. (Last name; First name/ initial; Title of the book/ article; Publisher/ journal; Year of publication.
    * Throughout the text of your paper, refer to authors quoted:
      * Modern authors/ researchers: Last name, Year of publication, Page quoted.
      * Classical authors: Name, Title of the work, Standard numerical identification of the chapter/ paragraph quoted.

**Testing** : All tests are based on class lectures and assignments and will
include identifications of names, places, events, etc.  Outside aid in
preparation for exams, such as reviewing materials with others, additional
readings or web-searching is perfectly acceptable. However, _no aid is
permitted during any exam_ (cf. below under _Honor System_ ). Students whose
native language is not English and who foresee difficulties understanding the
English of the tests may receive permission to use a dictionary (e.g. English-
Spanish) if they explain their need for a dictionary to me before the end of
the second week of the semester. Since _grades in all Classics courses are
exclusively based on students' performance_ , you are yourself solely
responsible for your grade in this course. In effect, you -- and only you! --
grade yourself. For the sake of fair treatment of all students, graduating
seniors and _those who must maintain a certain grade_ point average, e.g. to
keep a scholarship or to be admitted to an advanced degree program, should not
expect special consideration from the instructor but _should work particularly
conscientiously_ instead.   The responsibility not to jeopardize your GPA or
your graduation rests solely with you.

**Grading** :  **_Weighted grade ingredients_ :**

  * **Intermediate tests average - 50%**
  * **Final exam - 20%**
  * **Paper - 15%**
  * **Class participation - 15%**

|  _Breakdown according to percentages_ :  0-59%   =   F  
 60-69% =   D  
 70-77% =   C  
 78-79% =  C+  
 80-82% = B-  
 83-87% = B  
 88-89% = B+  
 90-92% = A-  
 93-100% = A  
---|---  
A grade of Incomplete will be given only in accordance with University
regulations. The University allows only an instructor's legitimate error as
the basis for changing a course grade after it has been submitted to the
registrar's office.  No later work can therefore be accepted to improve a
grade.

**Honor System** : George Mason University participates in an honor system
which has _existed in Virginia since 1842.   The GMU Honor Code_, to which you
have agreed to conform with your application for admission to the university,
provides that a student's word _is a declaration of good faith_ acceptable as
truth in all academic matters.   Specifically, the Honor Code applies to all
your written work submitted for a grade.  By putting your name to your exam
you certify that you are the only person who has produced the work you hand
in.  Students are expected, but faculty is required to report violations of
the Honor Code to the university's Honor Committee. If you are caught, do not
expect or ask for forgiveness. _Your enrollment in this class constitutes your
acknowledgment that you have received fair warning that cheating, plagiarism,
and other kinds of intellectual dishonesty are unacceptable_. For details of
the Honor System and Code consult the appropriate pages in the current
Undergraduate Catalog.

**A Final Note** : If I can be of any assistance to you, please do not
hesitate to get in touch with me. You are welcome to stop by my office and
chat about the field of Classical Studies and/or Humanities in general. And
take a look sometime at the GMU Classical Studies internet Homepage at
**[http://patriot.net/~lillard/cp](http://patriot.net/~lillard/chp)/** with
information on the program and a wealth of links to classical and related
sites all over the world (museums, universities, images, texts, etc.)  


