
    **SYLLABUS
    History of Art 102	EUROPEAN AND AMERICAN ART AND CIVILIZATION
    	FROM THE RENAISSANCE TO THE END OF THE 20TH CENTURY**
    
    Dr. Charles Minott
    Dept. of the History of Art
    307 Jaffe Building.  898-3247
    cminott@sas.upenn.edu
    
    Office Hours: Thurs. 2:00 - 4:00, and by appt.
    
    **Teaching Assistants**
    	
    	Rachel Iannocone
    	James Hargrove
    	Thomas Morton
    	Jon Seydl (WATU)
    	Stanley Weed
    
    
    
    	(note that this syllabus is a working document, subject to 	
    change and expansion.  Beyond the hard copy you receive on the first day 
    of class and any downloaded from the web, be sure to return to the 
    website for updated information at least once a week)
    
    
    **Lectures**
    
    	Lectures are normally scheduled on Monday and Wednesday at 1:00 
    P.M.  They are held in room B-1 Meyerson Hall. Attendance is required and 
    common courtesy rules apply to lecture room behavior. No Beepers, 
    Cellular telephones, reading, or lunching during the lectures, please.
    
    **Section Meetings**
    
    	Section meetings, held in Meyerson Hall, B-5.  They represent the 
    third hour of the course.  You have already enrolled in this course 
    through a section.  Some restructuring of the sections is inevitable.  
    The following sections are cancelled and will not be held.  If you 
    registered in one of them, you must reregister through PARIS. in another 
    section.:   
    
    **Cancelled Sections: 210; 212; 213; 214; 217**
    
    Sections will begin meeting in the week of Jan. 20.  Please be alert and 
    respond to the changes.
    	
    
    **Textbooks**
    
    	The basic text for the course is Hugh Honour and John Fleming, 
    _The Visual Arts: A History_. 4th ed., Englewood Cliffs, Prentice Hall, 
    1995 (H &F;).  Also required is Joshua Taylor, _Learning to Look_ , 
    Chicago, 
    University of Chicago Press (JT).  Both are available at Penn Book 
    Center, 3726 Walnut St.  Additional readings, from reserve section or 
    handout will be required and announced well in advance.  
    	Several Reading Assignments from M. Trachtenberg and I. Hyman, 
    _Archtitecture from Prehistroy to Post-Modernism_ , New York, Abrams, 
    1986 (T&H;) will be forthcoming.  Photocopies of these will be available to you 
    through your section leader.  Copies of this and all books will be on 
    reserve for the course.
    
    **Papers**
    
    	Students will write one response paper, one visual analysis 
    paper, and a term paper for this course.  the term paper will be 
    presented in outline, draft, and final forms.  Further details on these 
    papers will be provided as assignments are made.
    
    **Midterm Tests, Final Exam**
    
    Midterms: 	1. Friday, Feb. 14.  1:00 P.M.
    		2. Friday, Mar. 21.  1:00 P.M.
    
    			Room B-1, Meyerson Hall.
    
    Final Exam:  	Friday, May 2, 8:30-10:30. A.M.
    		   	Room B-1 Meyerson Hall. 
    
    	Midterm Tests and Final Exam will include short answer visual 
    identifications and brief comparative essays.  Final exam will include a 
    longer essay and additional comparisons.  Absence from tests excused only 
    by medical excuse from student health or by note from academic advisor in 
    School office attesting other circumstances preventing your attendance.
    
    **Grading**
    
    	The final grade will be based on participation in section, the 
    response paper, and the visual analysis = 30%; hour tests = 15% each; 
    term paper = 20%; final exam = 20%.
    
    	All tests and assignments must be completed by students taking 
    the course Pass/Fail.
    
    	A final grade of "Incomplete" must be negotiated with your 
    Teaching Assistant and must include a schedule for make-up of outstanding 
    work.
    
    
    
    
    
     **COURSE SCHEDULE** 
    
    1.  Monday, January 13.  Introduction: The Big Picture.
    
    2.  Wednesday, January 15.  Origins of the Renaissance, I:  The     	
    Trecento in Italy.
    		Giotto, Duccio, and their followers.
    
    No section meetings this week.
    
    Reading, week 1:  Joshua Taylor, _Learning to Look_ (whole).
    			   H &F; 367-387; T&H; 281-288.
    
    
    3.  Monday, January 20.  Origins of the Renaissance II: The 	
    International Gothic Style and Late Gothic Art in the 	Northern Countries.
    
    4.  Wednesday, January 22.  The Early Renaissance in Italy, I. 
    
    Section 1.  Section Meetings begin, as scheduled, starting Monday, Jan. 
    20.  Topics and requisite information for sections will appear on 
    syllabus.  Stay tuned).
    
    Reading, week 2:  H&F; 388-409.
    
    ADD PERIOD ENDS FRIDAY, JAN. 24
    
    
    5.  Monday, January 27.  The Early Renaissance in Italy, II.
    
    6.  Wednesday, January 29.  The High Renaissance I: Rome and 	Florence.
    
    Section 2: Learning to Look II  
    	Formal Analysis Paper assigned.
    
    Reading, week 3:  H&F; 410-426, 439-456.
    
    
    7.  Monday, February 3.  The High Renaissance II.
    
    8.  Wednesday, February 5.  The High Renaissance III.
    
    
    Section 3:  David Freedberg
    	**Formal Analysis Paper Due**
    
    Reading, week 4:  H &F; 427-438.
    
    
    9.   Monday, February 10.  Mannerism and the "Late Renaissance".
    
    10.  Wednesday, February 12.  **NO LECTURE TODAY**
    
    *    Friday, February 14.  **FIRST MIDTERM TEST**
    
    Section 4:  **AT THE PHILADELPHIA MUSEUM OF ART**
    
    **DROP PERIOD ENDS FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 14**	    
    
    Reading, week 5: H &F; 456-471
    
    11.  Monday, February 17. Late Renaissance Art in the Northern Countries
    
    12   Wednesday, February 19.  The Art of the Baroque, I: Rome.
    
    12.  Friday, February 21.  The Art of Baroque, II:
    			Flanders and Spain.
    
    Section 5:  Bellori, "Life of Caravaggio"
    
    Reading, week 6: H&F; 471-475 and 530-554
    
    
    13.  Monday,  February 24.  The Art of the Baroque, III: Holland.
    
    14.  Wednesday, February 26.  The Art of the Baroque, IV: 	      	 
    England and France.
    
    Section 6:  Baroque Architecture T&H;: 335-49, 358-69, 378-83
    
    Reading, week 7: H&F; 554-569
    
    
    15.  Monday,  March 3.  Rococco to Neoclassicism.
    
    16.  Wednesday, March 5.  Neoclassicism to Romanticism.
    
    Section 7: Barnes, _Raft of the Medusa_
    
    Reading, week 8: H &F; 570-611
    
    
    	(March 10, March 12.  Spring Break, no meetings this week)
    
    
    17.  Monday, March 17.  Romanticism, II. 
    
    18.  Wednesday, March 19. Realism.
    
    *    Friday, March 21.  SECOND MIDTERM TEST
    
    Section 8:  Campus Tour
    
    Reading, week 9: H&F; 611-632
    
    19.  Monday, March 24.  American Art in the 19th Century.
    
    20.  Wednesday, March 26.  Impressionism.
    
    Section 9:  N. Harris, "Collective Possessions:..."
    
    Reading, week 10: H&F; 632-642 and 656-670
    
    
    21.  Monday, March 31.  Post-Impressionism.
    
    23.  Wednesday, April 2.  Modernism and Movements at the Turn of 	 
    the Century.
    
    Section 10:  T. J. Clark, "A Bar at the Folies-Bergere"
    
    Reading, week 11: H&F; 671-688 and 716-730
    
    
    24.  Monday, April 7.  Cubism.
    
    25.  Wednesday, April 9. DaDa and Surrealism.
    
    Section 11:  Steinberg, "Contemporary Art and the Plight of its Public"
    
    Reading, week 12, H&F; 730-774
    
    26.  Monday, April 14.  Architecture: Art Nouveau to 
    the 	    	 	 International Style.
    
    27.  Wednesday, April 16.  Sculpture: Rodin to Maillol.
    
    Section 12:  **At the Rodin Museum**
    		Elsen, "A Tour of the 'Gates of Hell'"
    
    Reading, week 13, T &H;  487-544
    
    
    28.  Monday, April 21.  Painting and Sculpture in the USA.
    
    29.  Wednesday, April 23. Art at the End of the XX Century.
    
    Section 13:  **At the Philadelphia Museum of Art**
    
    Reading, week 14: H &F; 775-827
    
         Friday, May 2 @ 8:30-10:30 A.M.  FINAL EXAM
    

