Revolution in History: France, 1789-1799 Professor Martha Hanna

History 2100, section 001 Hellems 246; 492 8373

Fall 1999 Office Hrs: T: 11:00-12:00

Lectures: TR: 9:30 - 10:45 a.m. Th: 2:00- 3:30 p.m.

Geology 121 E-mail: Martha.Hanna@Colorado.edu  
  

_General Course Outline_  
  

During this course we will examine the question, "What is a revolution?" by
studying the social, political, economic, and cultural characteristics of the
French Revolution of 1789-1799. We will use lectures, readings, class
discussions and assignments to analyze the following topics:  
  

(1) Towards a definition of "revolution." What do we mean by "revolution"?
What distinguishes a revolution from other forms of political insurrection?  
  

(2) Revolutionary pre-conditions. What are the political, economic, social,
and cultural factors that bring revolutions about? What are the differences
between long-term and short-term causes of revolution? Why does revolution
occur when it does?  
  

(3) Revolutionary upheaval. What are the most important political, economic,
and social events in the years of revolutionary upheaval? What explains the
intensity of revolutionary politics? Under what circumstances does violence
occur, and is it an inevitable component of political revolution?  
  

(4) Revolutionary actors. Who participates in revolution? What is the role of
revolutionary leadership? What is the role and importance of the revolutionary
crowd? What relationship obtains between revolutionary leaders and the
revolutionary crowd? What role does gender play in the composition of the
revolutionary crowd?  
  

(5) Revolution and Counter-revolution. Why, and under what conditions, does
revolution give rise to counter-revolution? What are the issues that provoke
counter-revolution, and why are these issues so controversial within the
revolutionary nation? Is counter-revolution a necessary part of the
revolutionary process?  
  

(6) Political stabilization. Under what circumstances, and for what reasons,
does revolution come to an end? What are the lasting achievements of the
Revolution? What has changed and what has remained relatively unaffected by
the revolutionary process? Why? What is the long-term significance of this
revolution, for the nation that experienced it and more generally?  
  

_Required Readings_  
  

(1) Voltaire, _Candide_ , trans. John Butt (London: Penguin Books, 1947).

Written in the mid-18th century, _Candide_ is one of the great texts of the
Enlightenment. It provides a witty and scathing critique of pre-Revolutionary
French society by one of the most influential writers of the age. To read
_Candide_ is to see how a brilliant critic of _ancien r egime_ France
perceived the society in which he lived.  
  

(2) Laura Mason and Tracey Rizzo (ed.), _The French Revolution: A Document
Collection_ (New York: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1999).

Historians' basic tools are the documents produced by participants in and
observers of the events the historians are studying. Written at the time,
rather than many decades later, these primary source documents (which include
such things as letters, legal texts, diaries, legislative debates, birth and
marriage registers) provide us with direct evidence of past events and the
reflections of historical actors. During the semester we will read extensively
from this collection of primary source documents in order to understand the
character of pre-Revolutionary and Revolutionary France.

(3) Anatole France, _The Gods will Have Blood_ , trans. Frederick Davies
(London: Penguin Books, 1979).

A gripping novel, set during the Reign of Terror (1793-94), _The Gods will
Have Blood_ captures vividly the political, social, and cultural conditions
that prevailed during the most violent and terrifying period of the
Revolution. Written more than a century after the Terror, it helps us to
understand how the Revolution has been remembered in French history and
culture.  
  

_Course Requirements_  
  

Students are expected to attend lectures regularly and to complete the
assignments on or before the due dates. _TO PASS THE COURSE YOU MUST COMPLETE
EACH WRITTEN ASSIGNMENT_. Students taking the course for Core Curriculum
credit cannot take it pass/fail; students taking this course as an elective
are allowed to take it pass/fail, but must complete each assignment in any
case. Grades will be determined in the following way:  
  

(1) Mid-term examination (October 14, 1999) 30%

(2) 5 mini-papers on documentary readings 30%

(3) Participation in scheduled class discussions

(September 21, November 11) 10%

(4)[ Final Examination (Tuesday, December 14, 1999, 11:30 a.m. - 2:30
p.m.)](final,fall99.htm) 30%  
  

The mid-term and final examinations will be in-class essay examinations. A set
of essay questions will be distributed one week prior to each test/exam. From
the questions distributed in advance, two will be selected at random on the
day of the test. You will be required to answer one of the two questions thus
selected. Students are expected to take the tests on the designated dates. In
the event of a serious illness or family emergency, it might be possible to
reschedule the test, but you _must contact the instructor (in person, by
phone, or by e-mail) before the scheduled test time_ to make the necessary
arrangements.  
  

Each of the scheduled discussions is worth 5 points; if you attend both you
will earn the full 10 points; if you attend only one discussion, you will
receive only 5 points, and hence will receive a failing grade for that portion
of the course.  
  

During the course of the semester, we will be reading eight sets of primary
sources that are relevant to the topics being discussed in lectures. From
these eight sets of readings, you will be required to choose five topics on
which you will write a short (2 pp.) mini-paper. Each of the five mini-papers
must answer a question (distributed in advance) concerning the primary sources
under review for that particular set of lectures. Each mini-paper is due IN
CLASS ON THE DAY GIVEN IN THE SCHEDULE OF LECTURES. ASSIGNMENTS SUBMITTED LATE
WILL BE ACCEPTED ONLY AT THE INSTRUCTOR'S DISCRETION, AND PENALTIES FOR
LATENESS MIGHT BE APPLIED. DO NOT ASSUME THAT YOU CAN TURN IN THE ASSIGNMENT
LATE WITHOUT THE INSTRUCTOR'S PERMISSION.  
  

_Schedule of Lectures, Tests, and Assignments_  
  

Aug. 24 Introduction: What is a Revolution?

Aug. 26 Old Regime France: An overview  
  

Aug. 31 Politics of Absolutism

Sept. 2 Social Structure: The Privileged Orders

["A Treatise on Orders," " _Lit de justice_ . . .,"The _French Revolution: A
Document Collection_](document_assignment1.htm), pp. 16-27.  
  

Sept. 7 Social Structure: The Third Estate

Sept. 9 Forces of Change: War and Debt  
  

Sept. 14 Forces of Change: Population Growth

Sept. 16 Forces of Change: New Ideas  
  

Sept. 21 [Discussion: _Candide_](CANDIDE.htm)

Sept. 23 Failure of Economic Reform  
  

Sept. 28 Collapse of the Old Regime

Sept. 30 Convening the Estates General

["Letter from the King . . .," "What is the Third Estate?" " _Cahiers de dol
eances_," _The French Revolution: A Document
Collection_](document_assignment2.htm), pp. 49-58.  
  

Oct. 5 Political Revolution, 1789

Oct. 7 Social Revolution: Urban and Rural  
  

Oct. 12 Revolutionary Accomplishments

["Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen," _The French Revolution: A
Document Collection_](document_assignment3.htm), pp. 101-104.

Oct. 14[MID-TERM TEST](studyguide_fall99.htm)  
  

Oct. 19 Origins of Counter-Revolution

Oct. 21 Failure of Constitutional Monarchy

["Debate over the Civil Constitution of the Clergy," "Declaration of the King
Addressed to all the French. . .," _The French Revolution: A Document
Collection_](document_assignment4.htm), pp. 144-155.  
  

Oct. 26 Radicalization of the Revolution

Oct. 28 Jacobins vs. Girondins

Nov. 2 NO CLASS

Nov. 4 Origins of the Reign of Terror

[FIFTH MINI-PAPER: "Deposing the King," "The September Massacres," _The French
Revolution: A Document Collection_](document _assignment5.htm), pp. 170-177.  
  

Nov. 9 The Reign of Terror: Politics and War

[SIXTH MINI-PAPER: "Instituting the Terror," "Law on Suspects," _The French
Revolution: A Document Collection_](document_assignment6.htm), pp. 225-232.

Nov. 11 The Reign of Terror: Culture and Society

Nov. 16 [Discussion: _The Gods will Have Blood_](GodsBlood.htm)(5 POINTS)

Nov. 18 Dismantling the Terror  
  

Nov. 23 International War

Nov. 25 THANKSGIVING: No Class  
  

Nov. 30 Napoleon: the Man and the Myth

[SEVENTH MINI-PAPER: "Proclamation to the French Nation," _French Revolution:_

_A Document Collection_](document_assignment7.htm), pp. 334-336.

Dec. 2 Napoleonic France: Consolidating and Betraying the Revolution  
  

Dec. 7. The Legacy of the French Revolution

[EIGHTH MINI-PAPER: "The Imperial Religious Settlement," "The French Civil
Code," _French Revolution: A Document Collection_](document_assignment8.htm),
pp.336-347.

  
  
  
  

  
  

