** **

** COLLOQUIUM IN PUBLIC HISTORY** ****

** **

**Dr. Rodney Carlisle - Armitage 354**

**History Department phone: 225 6080**

**Fall, 1998**

**email: carlisle@crab.rutgers.edu**

This course is designed to introduce the student to a number of ways in which
the discipline of History is applied both by academics and by non-academic
practitioners. Through readings and discussions, students develop familiarity
with several basic trends in recent historiography, and how they have affected
the profession. After a review of some aspects of recent literature on the
practice of history, each student will chose a particular public historian,
review his or her career and works, and present both an oral and a written
evaluation of the author's approach. The student should choose a living
author, and should arrange to interview the author in person or by telephone.
See below for details on interview. If the interview is arranged in person, it
can serve as an introduction to some of the methods of oral history technique,
which we will discuss in the course. For the purposes of this syllabus, the
evaluation of the individual historian will be called an " _Historiographic
Note_. "



Each week through weeks 2-9, each student is to submit a single copy of a 3-4
page written commentary on the readings, called a " _Commentary_ " in this
syllabus. This section of the course will serve to introduce new graduate
students to the colloquium method of instruction. For new and more advanced
students, the writing exercises may help sharpen analytic and writing skills.
All should gain a picture of some of the current trends in history and public
history from these readings, their discussion, and the Commentaries.

Guidelines for preparing both the Commentaries and the Historiographic Note
are presented later in this syllabus.



**READINGS**



**Barzun and Graff: _The Modern Researcher_ (5th ed.)**

**Benson, et. al.: _Presenting the Past_**

**Marty and Kyvig: _Nearby History_**

**Henderson and Kaeppler: _Exhibiting Dilemmas_**

**West: _Domesticating History_**

**Jones and Cantelon: _Corporate Archives_**

**Stull: _History on the Internet_ **

Materials from: Current Public History controversies. [These will be
distributed in class.]









**SCHEDULE**

**_WEEK_** **_TOPIC/DISCUSSION_ _READING TO BE COMPLETED_**



1. Introduction to the topic



2. History as Scientific Method Barzun and Graff



3. New perspectives: Social sides Benson:as assigned 



4\.  New perspectives: Nearby History Marty and Kyvig



5. Historic artifacts as documents Henderson and Kaeppler



[At this session, each student should submit the name of the historian who
will be the topic of his or her Historiographic Note, together with a list of
that author's published works, in the order of publication date. Those works
to be read for the Historiographic Note should be marked with an asterisk.]



6. Homes as historic texts West



7\.  Corporate Archives Jones and Cantelon



8. Contemporary access: Stull



9. Contemporary Public history cases [handout]





Sessions 10-14:



Student seminar oral presentations of Historiographic Notes on particular
historians, as scheduled.





  

** GUIDELINES**

**_GUIDELINE FOR COMMENTARIES ON READINGS_** __



R.1.In general the focus in the written Commentary should center on these
questions:

How do the authors define a good approach to history?

What is the underlying central thesis of the work?

What are the strengths and weaknesses of the argument as presented?

What ideological positions are reflected in the authors' approaches to  the
past?

What insights from the authors are particularly valuable?

What limitations do you detect in the authors' approach?



R.2. Good style, of course, dictates that you not cover these questions as if
they were simple question and answer propositions. You should write a coherent
essay addressing these and other aspects of the work you think are pertinent.
You should strive to express your own reactions, expressing both your positive
and negative responses to the questions in R.1.



R.3. The manuscript should be no longer than 3 to 4 pages, double spaced.



R.4. You should use a word processor, should double space, and should number
your pages. References to page numbers in the works you cite may follow the
MLA style if you prefer.

**_ _**

**_GUIDELINE FOR THE "EXECUTIVE SUMMARY" OF HISTORIOGRAPHIC NOTE_**



E.S.1. When scheduled to make the oral presentation, each student is to bring
a one page "Executive Summary" of his or her oral presentation of the
Historiographic Note for distribution to the group. Prepare sufficient copies
of the Executive Summary for all members of the class. The oral presentation
will be limited to 20 to 35 minutes, to be followed by a discussion up to 10
minutes.



**The Executive Summary should:**

E.S.2. Succinctly present the chronology of the historian's life: birth,
education, career.



E.S.3. Present a list of the publications of the author (if any), with those
you are discussing in detail marked with an asterisk.



E.S.4. Present a paragraph summarizing the historian's ideology, slant, or
approach. In this paragraph you should give an indication of the historian's
self-image.





**_GUIDELINE FOR ORAL PRESENTATION 20 TO 35 MINUTES_**



O.P.1. Using the Executive Summary, you should make clear for the class what
type of historian is the subject of your study. You should be familiar with
some of his or her works (written or other) and be prepared to discuss them,
and to answer questions about your subject. Those scheduled later in the
semester will have the advantage of having completed the oral interview, and
should be able to give the class an impression of the historian's personality
and character. In one sense, your oral presentation is much like a "briefing"
presented at staff meetings of corporate and government organizations. Do not
think of your presentation as a lecture.



O.P.2. After the presentation, you should be sure to make notes on any
questions, comments, suggestions, and ideas received in the class and work to
incorporate useful elements in your final written version. Your ability to
incorporate suggestions will be part of the judgment on the final written
product.



**_WRITTEN PRESENTATION OF HISTORIOGRAPHIC NOTE_**



H.N.1. The final written version of the Historiographic Note is to be
submitted in the 14th week; the due date will be announced. The written
treatment of the historian chosen should, as a minimum, accomplish the
following:



H.N.2. Give biographical details, including education and publication
interests.

H.N.3. The historian's point of view and style of historical work should be
examined. In order to explore these questions, the student should present a
close examination of two or more of the historian's works. If the historian's
work has taken the form of exhibits, displays, programs, or other non-written
historical products, those should be analyzed. In particular, such issues as
these are appropriate:

What is the historian's point of view, on political/social issues?

What types of sources does he or she use?

How well does the historian measure up to the standards set by Barzun and
Graff?

What sort of audience/client is the historian writing for?

How receptive is the historian to such techniques as:

quantification, oral history, artifact/non-paper documents, social
perspectives,  use of modern tools of the trade including computer, photocopy,
tape- recorder, or on-line research?

How does the historian interpret the material he or she works with?





H.N. 4. As to length, each student must define an appropriate treatment. In
general  a paper under 8 pages would probably be much too short for such a
topic; one over 20 pages would probably be more extensive than  necessary. Try
to aim at about 10-15 pages for the main body of the  paper.



Each student is to prepare a direct transcript of at least three pages of the
tape to include as an appendix to the paper. You can choose any section of the
tape to transcribe. The transcript should indicate the questioner with your
initials, the respondent with their initials, and show the date of the
interview. You may leave grammar and syntax uncorrected in this transcript.



**_ _**

**_WRITTEN MATERIAL IN GENERAL_**



Applicable to Commentaries, Historiographic Note, and Executive Summary:



W.1. Students should use a word processor. Beginning students may submit
initial papers typed. The college computer center provides word processing
equipment, and has evening hours.



W.2. All material should be double spaced (including block quotes, endnotes,
and bibliographic material).



W.3. All pages should be numbered.



W.4. All material should be error-free.



W.5. Style should follow _The Chicago Manual of Style_ , although in the
commentaries, MLA style for cited material is acceptable.



W.6. _Style or other errors identified in early papers should not occur in
later papers._

W.7. You should learn to identify any weaknesses you have in style and to edit
your own work so as to correct them.



If this is your first graduate course, you should recognize that these
standards will be common to the rest of the graduate program.







**_GUIDELINES FOR INTERVIEW_**

It is basic to human nature to be complimented to be interviewed regarding
one's life, works, and experiences. Some students find it a good method to
call the subject, to describe their purposes, and to arrange to call back or
to meet at a more convenient time. Phone interviews should be under 30
minutes; direct interviews under 75. Face to face interviews are far
preferable to telephone interviews. Telephone interviews can be readily
recorded (with the subject's oral permission on the tape) with an inexpensive
jack or suction-cup microphone from Radio Shack.



The actual interview can combine Oral History and journalistic interviewing
techniques. It is almost essential to tape the interview, which should only be
done with the subject's awareness and consent (whether over the phone or in
person). One should have a list of questions, but have them open-ended.
Several useful questions are these: "Tell me about your background." "How did
you become an historian?" "Do you have any particular models as historians
that you admire or emulate?" "What factors contributed to your choice of
topics?" "Tell me about how you actually go about conducting your research."
"How do you visualize your audience?" You should supplement these ahead of
time with at least 20 more designed to address the career of the particular
historian you are interviewing; if the historian has published, you should
have read as much of the historian's materialas you can find and key your
questions to that material. If the historian's products take another form
(such as exhibits, restoration, organizational work, curatorship, or site
preservation and presentation) you should be as familiar as possible with that
work.



The student should be prepared to summarize for the class lessons learned
about the process of interviewing itself, while conducting the interview.



Further, specific guidelines and "How-to" points regarding the oral interview
will be distributed in class. You should read and follow the guidelines as
discussed in Marty and Kyvig, _Nearby History_.

Be sure to design and obtain a signature on an oral history release form. Keep
the tape, prying out the tabs so that the tape cannot be recorded over. If
this is our first experience using a tape recorder in a serious fashion, be
sure to familiarize yourself with the working of your equipment prior to the
interview.

** **

**GUIDELINES ON GRADING**



The course grade will reflect these aspects:



Quality of written Commentaries

Quality of oral participation in class discussion

Quality of oral presentation of Historiographic Note

Quality of written Historiographic Note



The grade is not calculated by a formula with set proportions. However, the
longer Historiographic Note is a major component in the evaluation of your
performance in the course.



In general, these letter grades on work submitted should convey the indicated
meaning and are more or less standard in our graduate program.



A = Expected level of performance at graduate level

A- = Work is at graduate level with only minor flaws

B+ = Work shows good promise of success in graduate level

B = Acceptable work

B- = Marginally acceptable work

C+ and below: Work is not at the graduate level; improvement is required. Note
that course grades in this range are assigned to students who do not correct
errors or style problems revealed in early papers. Thus errors that lead to B
or B- grades on early papers if occurring in later papers will lead to
progressively lower grades.

Note that two or more absences, excused or not, generally prevent a student
from achieving a B- or better grade. This standard is necessary because so
much of the learning and work of the course takes place in the class meetings.



If you have difficulty with an assignment, or if you do not understand either
the assignment or the evaluation of it, please feel free to contact me in the
office (by appointment) through email, or at the classroom.

