**HIST 317                  DR. ANTHONY STEINHOFF                 SPRING
2002**

**The Age of the French Revolution and Napoleon**



| **Office:** 203 Brock Hall  
**Phone:** 755-4581  
**E-mail:** [Anthony-Steinhoff@utc.edu](mailto:Anthony-Steinhoff@utc.edu)  
**Home page:** [http://www.utc.edu/~asteinho](http://www.utc.edu/%7Easteinho)
|

**Class Hours:** MWF 9:00-9:50  
  
**Office Hours:** MWF 10:00-10:50  
and by appointment  
---|---  
  
**  
  
Course Description**

The era of the French Revolution has long occupied a central place in efforts
to understand modern France and the course of modern European history. For
some, this period marked the end of feudalism and the onset of a new,
capitalist-industrialist epoch. For others, the Revolution elaborated new
ideas and categories that became hallmarks of the Western political tradition:
citizenship, the nation-state, and human rights. Yet, the events after 1789
also fostered political radicalization, civil war, and terror, which
discredited the Revolution in the eyes of many French and Europeans. Thus, for
decades after Napoleon's fall in 1815, the memory of the Revolution aroused
both hope and profound antipathy, inside as well as outside of France. While
the forces of revolution eventually triumphed in Europe during the long
nineteenth century, the French continued to fight the Revolution, in words and
deeds, well into the twentieth century. Indeed, as bicentennial commemorations
in 1989 made manifest, discussions of French national and political identity
since 1789 have turned largely on this issue of endorsing -- or rejecting --
the Revolution.

This course seeks to introduce students to the history and historiography of
this turbulent and momentous era. In part, we will examine the narrative of
events, from the origins of the crisis in Old Regime France through the
outbreak of the revolt, the moderate and radical stages of the revolution, and
the post-Thermidorian chaos, to Napoleon Bonaparte's assumption of power and
his defeat in 1815. But we will also assess the impact of the range of changes
and disturbances that come under the rubric of "Revolution" on the French and
on other Europeans: war, economic disruption, electoral reform, religious
change, as well as new notions of social and political rights. Finally, and
most importantly, we will investigate how scholars have sought to understand
the Revolution and its consequences. Why _did_ the Revolution break out? What
kind of a revolution was it? What was revolutionary about the French
Revolution? Why did it become radical? Did Napoleon complete or terminate the
Revolution? Who were the citizens that the Revolution created? These are just
a few of the many questions we will address throughout the semester.

In terms of format, the course relies on a combination of lectures and
discussions. The success of class sessions will depend on a regular and
engaged reading of assigned material. Jeremy Popkin's _Short History of the
French Revolution_ will provide a narrative thread for the semester, which we
will develop further by analyzing contemporary documents and excerpts from
classic and current interpretations of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic
periods. The discussion sessions will function as a central way for you to
explore and make sense of this complicated era. They will also prepare you to
express your ideas on a specific aspect of the epoch in a more formal and
rigorous fashion: an essay. Finally, a mid-term and take-home final will
facilitate my assessment of your comprehension of the course's larger themes.

  

**Required Reading** (available for purchase at the bookstore or via the
internet)

  * Jeremy D. Popkin, _A Short History of the French Revolution_ , 3rd edition (Prentice Hall, 2002) [= Popkin in Course Calendar, below].  

  * Keith Michael Baker, ed., _The Old Regime and the French Revolution_ (U Chicago Press) [= Baker].  

  * Marvin R. Cox, _The Place of the French Revolution in History_ (Houghton Mifflin) [ = Cox].  

  * Additional course materials will be made available via a packet (for purchase from the department) and the course web site (as indicated on the Course Calendar). 

  

**Course Requirements**

  * Regular attendance at lectures; participation in discussions (see below); completion of informal assignments (200 points total). NB: I take attendance on announced discussion days; you will lose 20 points for every absence after the first. 

You should complete the readings for the particular day on which they appear
in the course calendar (below). Lectures and discussions assume that you have
the knowledge presented in those readings.

The informal assignments consist of brief responses (typed) to primary source
documents and selected secondary source readings. They are designed to help
you understand and evaluate this material, and serve as notes for the
examinations.

  * An 8-10 page essay about an aspect of the French Revolution or Napoleonic era of your choice; due on 1 April (no joke). Specific guidelines for this paper will be distributed on 23 January. (300 points).  

  * In-class mid-term (200 points) and take-home final (300 points) examinations. NB: The examinations will require not only a thorough understanding of the lectures, _but also_ a solid grasp of the secondary and primary source readings. 



There are, thus, a total of 1000 possible points. An "A" grade will be 900
points and above a "B" 800-899, a "C" 700-799; and a "D" 600-699.



**Additional Policies**

You must complete _all_ major requirements (essay, exams) in order to receive
a passing grade in this course. Late assignments will not be accepted. I also
reserve the right to alter the means of evaluation if I sense that the class
as a whole is not keeping up. This may be in the form of quizzes.

I do not award the grade of "I" (incomplete) for this course except under the
most exceptional circumstances. Everyone receives a grade based on what s/he
has earned as of the date of the final exam.

Make-ups exams will be administered only with documented proof of an
acceptable condition (death in family, arrest warrant, hospitalization, etc.).

_Your decision to enroll and stay in this course means that you accept the
terms of this syllabus. This includes attending class regularly. It is your
responsibility to make certain that you do so. I can not excuse absences for
lack of planning or for your choice to schedule alternative activities during
regularly scheduled classroom time._

If you are having difficulties or wish to discuss a point of interest or
concern with me, please contact me as soon as possible, either during office
hours or via E-mail. I am also available to meet you at other mutually
convenient times by special appointment.

  
_ATTENTION: If you are a student with a disability and think that you might
need special assistance or a special accommodation in this class or any other
class, call the Office for Students with Disabilities/College Access Program
at 755-4006 or come by the office, 110 Frist Hall. Examples of disabilities
might include blindness/low vision, communication disorders, deafness/hearing
impairments, emotional/psychological disabilities, learning disabilities, and
other health impairments. This list is not exhaustive._  
  




**COURSE CALENDAR**



**Week I: France in the Old Regime**

1/7 Course Introduction.

1/9 A Society of Orders and Privileges. Popkin, 1-15; Cox, 15-39.

1/11 Enlightened France? Popkin, 16-20; M. Jacob, "The Enlightenment
Redefined" (packet).

  

**Week II: The Crisis of the Old Regime**

1/14 A Bankrupt Monarchy. Popkin, 21-29; Baker, 124-35.

1/16 A Critical Culture. Cox, 196-99; R. Chartier, "Do Books Make
Revolutions?" (packet).

1/18 _Discussion:_ The Calling of the Estates General. Baker, 154-83.  
         [Questions for Discussion](http://www.utc.edu/~asteinho/317/Disc1.html) .

  

**Week III: The Revolution Begins**

1/21 **Martin Luther King Holiday (no class)**.

1/23 From Reform to Revolt: May-July 1789. Popkin, 29-35; Baker, 199-208; Cox,
90-102.  
         ** _[Distribute Instructions for Interpretative Essay](http://www.utc.edu/~asteinho/317/EssayAssign.html)_

1/25 Ending the Old Regime. Popkin, 36-43; Baker, 208-31.

  

**Week IV: Remaking France**

1/28 Defining the Nation. Popkin, 43-48; Baker, 249-61, T. Tackett, "Nobles
and the Third Estate" (packet).

1/30 _Discussion: Defining Citizens_. Baker 237-39, 242-49, 261-68; Sewell,
"Le Citoyen/la citoyenne" (packet).  
         [Questions for Discussion](http://www.utc.edu/~asteinho/317/Disc2.html) .

2/1 The Church and the Revolution. Popkin 48-52; Baker 239-42.

  

**Week V: The Liberal Revolution Unravels**

2/4 A New Political Culture. Popkin, 53-60; Baker, 278-85.

2/6 [Class cancelled - weather]

2/8 Troubles at Home and Abroad. Popkin 61-72; [Declaration of the Duke of
Brunswick](http://history.hanover.edu/texts/bruns.htm) C. Petitfrere, "The
Origins of the Civil War in the Vendee" (packet).  
      [Questions for Discussion](http://www.utc.edu/~asteinho/317/Disc3.html) .

  

**Week VI: The Radical Spirit**

2/11 _Midterm Examination._  
         [Information for the Midterm Examination](http://www.utc.edu/~asteinho/317/MidtermInfo.html).

2/13 The Convention and the Republic. Popkin, 77-81; Baker, 324-330, 362-67.

2/15 _Discussion_ : Trying the King. Popkin, 73-77; Baker 286-90, 302-24;
[Indictment of Louis XIV](http://www.utc.edu/~asteinho/317/indictment.htm).

  

**Week VII: The Terror**

2/18 France and the War. Baker, 340-42; Ozouf, "Between War and Terror"
(packet).

2/20 Political Extremism in Revolutionary France. Popkin, 81-94; Baker,
342-62.

2/22 _Discussion: Understanding the Terror_. Furet,  "Terror" (packet); B.
Singer, "Violence in the French Revolution" (packet).  
         [Questions for Discussion](http://www.utc.edu/~asteinho/317/Disc4.html).

  

**Week VIII: A Cultural Revolution**

2/25 The "People" and Politics. Cox, 123-40; Baker, 330-40.

2/27 The Discourses of Universality and Virtue. Baker, 368-84 (re-read as
necessary 342-54); Cox, 187-96.  
         **Essay Topics Due**.

3/1 _Discussion: The Symbols of Change_. Cox, 187-200; J. Leith,  "Ephemera"
(packet); Images of the Revolution (via WWW).  
       [Questions for Discussion](http://www.utc.edu/~asteinho/317/Disc5.html).     

  

**Week IX: Whose France?**

3/4 A Festive Culture. Baker, 384-91; Cox, 170-82.

3/6 The New Man? Jews and Blacks in the Revolutionary Image; Baker, 242-47;
Shanti Marie Singham, "Betwixt Cattle and Men: Jews, Blacks, and Women, and
the Declaration of the Rights of Man" (packet).

3/8 _Discussion: Women and Revolutionary Political Culture_. Cox, 230-248;
Hufton,  "Counter-Revolutionary Women" (packet).  
       [Questions for Discussion](http://www.utc.edu/~asteinho/317/Disc6.html) .

  

**Week X: Spring Break**

**3/11-3/15 No Class.**

  

**Week XI: Thermidor and Beyond**

3/18 Politics after the Terror. Popkin, 94-105; Hunt et al., "The Failure of
the Liberal Republic" (packet).

3/20 Society and Culture under the Directory.

3/22 France and Europe. Popkin, 105-107.

  

**Week XII: Enter Napoleon**

3/25 _Discussion: Dissolving the Directory_. Popkin, 107-115; Baker 392-416.  
        [Questions for Discussion](http://www.utc.edu/~asteinho/317/Disc7.html) .

3/27 The First Consul and the Emperor. Bonaparte, "[Proclamation to the French
Nation](http://www.napoleonseries.org/reference/political/legislation/proclamation.cfm)";
[Law Reorganizing the Administrative System
(1800)](http://www.napoleonseries.org/reference/political/legislation/administrative.cfm);
Furet, "Bonaparte" (packet).

3/29 **Official Holiday (no class)**.

  

**Week XIII: Napoleon and France**

4/1 Redefining the Political. Popkin, 115-123; Baker, 416-27.  
        **** Essay due.**

4/3 Religious and Educational Reforms. Lyons, "Law Codes and Lycees" (packet).

4/5 The Economic and Social Agenda. Popkin 128-134; Ellis, "Napoleonic Elites"
(packet).

  

**Week XIV: Napoleon and Europe**

4/8 The French Army Abroad. Popkin, 124-128.

4/10 The Impact of Napoleon. Lyons, "Napoleon Bonaparte" (packet).

4/12 Able I Was... Popkin, 134-138.

  

**Week XIV: The Revolutionary Heritage**

4/15 The Revolution and the Course of French History. Cox, 42-54, 153-69,
213-30.  
           _** Distribute Take-Home Exam Questions._

4/17 _Discussion: Discourses on Revolution in Modern Times_. Cox, 141-53;
Seigel,  "Politics, Memory, Illusion" (packet); and L. Trotsky, "On the
Russian Revolution" (excerpts via WWW).  
         [Questions for Discussion](http://www.utc.edu/~asteinho/317/Disc8.html).

4/19 The French Revolution, Human Rights, and the Democratic Tradition. Cox,
248-64; Geoffrey Best, "The French Revolution and Human Rights (packet).  
         [Questions for Discussion](http://www.utc.edu/~asteinho/317/Disc9.html).



**Week XV:**

4/22 Conclusions (last day of class).

  

**TAKE HOME EXAM DUE 12:00 P.M. (NOON), Tuesday, April 23, 2002.**



**

* * *

**

**INTERESTING AND USEFUL WEBSITES**

[**Liberty, Equality, Fraternity**](http://chnm.gmu.edu/revolution/) **:** An
impressive multi-media website, developed under the leadership of two of the
Revolution's foremost scholars: Lynn Hunt and Jack Censer. Contains primary
texts, timelines, images, songs, and historiographical discussions of the
Revolutionary era.

[**NapoleonSeries.org**](http://www.napoleonseries.org/) ** _:_** companion
site to the TV series on Napoleon. Excellent source for primary sources and
information on the Napoleonic period.

