![](../ISimages/OCEheadergraphIS.jpg)  
**YOU ARE HERE!** **\-- Independent Study -> Courses and Enrollment-> History
106**  
---  
  

**HIS 106**  

####  HIS 105  
THE UNITED STATES SINCE 1877

#####  INTRODUCTION

History has been defined as a study of all that men and women have thought or
done. This definition establishes an extremely large range; nothing can be
left out. For convenience, historians divide the past into various time
periods, or, as in the case of American history, into national studies. This
course deals with the United States from the discovery of America through
Reconstruction.

It is an attempt to not only find out what happened but also why. Because such
a great deal happened and because there are many explanations as to why
certain events took place, a course of this nature limits itself to basic
material and significant interpretations. Your primary concern will be to
consider who, what, when, where, and significance. In other words, you will be
expected to emphasize facts more than interpretations, but you will also have
the opportunity to consider and evaluate what the facts mean to American
history.

The relevance of history to the present is one of the first questions to be
asked. History deals with the past, but it would be impossible to understand
the present without having some knowledge of the past. Suppose that you
suddenly developed a case of amnesia. What would you know of yourself? What
would you do? Your personal experiences determine what you are today; that is,
your history makes you what you are in the present. The history of a nation or
a civilization does the same thing.

Since history does not occur in a vacuum and men and women do not act without
cause, history may be better understood if you consider it from a cause and
effect relationship. Certain forces cause men and women to act in one of
several ways. A cause creates a particular effect which in turn generates a
demand for further change, and so on, to the present. The study of American
history is the study of change--the study of cause and effect. You will see
this most clearly as the course unfolds and you do your lessons.

This course offers three (3) hours of academic credit.

#####  MID-COURSE TEST AND FINAL EXAMINATION

The student will take a Mid-Course Test and Final Examination at a physical
location in a college or university setting. Detailed instructions and Mid-
Course Test and Final Examination applications are included in the online
syllabus. Information regarding tests and procedures can be found in [General
Information](indstinf.html).

#####  INSTRUCTOR

Dr. Michael Namorato is a professor of history. He received his B.A from Iona
University and his M.A. and Ph.D from Michigan State University.

#####  REQUIRED TEXTBOOKS

Brinkley, Alan. _American History: A Survey. Volume II: Since 1865_. Ninth
edition. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995. ISBN 0-07-007957-9.

  
  

The textbook may be purchased from MBS Direct, PO Box 597, Columbia, MO 65205,
telephone 800-325-3252. You **must** use the editions listed above. MBS Direct
stocks texts in the editions specified for courses offered by The University
of Mississippi to make them readily available to students. For additional
information about ordering the textbook and student packet from MBS Direct,
please consult the information flyer and order form in the course enrollment
packet. To order by use of the Internet, please access
http://direct.mbsbooks.com/olemiss.htm.

To apply for the course, complete the [Independent Study Course Application
Form](https://www.ics.olemiss.edu/forms/online_registration.html).

If you need assistance or have additional questions please email us at
[indstudy@olemiss.edu](mailto:indstudy@olemiss.edu).  
  
---  
[![](http://server.iad.liveperson.net/hc/32826542/?cmd=repstate&site=32826542&category=en;woman;2&ver=1)](http://server.iad.liveperson.net/hc/32826542/?cmd=file&file=visitorWantsToChat&site=32826542&byhref=1)  
---  
[![](http://server.iad.liveperson.net/hc/32826542/?cmd=hccredit&site=32826542)](http://server.iad.liveperson.net/hc/32826542/?cmd=PoweredByPage&site=32826542)  
  
[independent study home
page](http://www.outreach.olemiss.edu/independent_study/), [about independent
study](http://www.outreach.olemiss.edu/independent_study/OCEpagesIS/OCEaboutIS.htm),
[enrollment](http://www.outreach.olemiss.edu/independent_study/OCEpagesIS/OCEenrollindxIS.htm),  
[courses](http://www.outreach.olemiss.edu/independent_study/OCEpagesIS/OCEcourseofferIS.htm),
[grading](http://www.outreach.olemiss.edu/independent_study/OCEpagesIS/OCEgradexamndxIS.htm),
[exams](http://www.outreach.olemiss.edu/independent_study/OCEpagesIS/OCEexaminfondxIS.htm),
[credit](http://www.outreach.olemiss.edu/independent_study/OCEpagesIS/OCEcreditindxIS.htm),
[student
services](http://www.outreach.olemiss.edu/independent_study/OCEpagesIS/OCEstuserviceIS.htm),
[policies](http://www.outreach.olemiss.edu/independent_study/OCEpagesIS/OCEpoliciesndxIS.htm),
[fees](http://www.outreach.olemiss.edu/independent_study/OCEpagesIS/OCEfeesIS.htm),
[financial
aid](http://www.outreach.olemiss.edu/independent_study/OCEpagesIS/OCEfinaidndxIS.htm),  
[just for
teachers](http://www.outreach.olemiss.edu/independent_study/OCEpagesIS/OCEteachersIS.htm)  
  
---  
  
![](http://www.outreach.olemiss.edu/independent_study/isvirtualincludes/ISfooterVII.jpg)

[Ole Miss Live!Cam](http://www.olemiss.edu/livecam/) | [For
Visitors](http://www.olemiss.edu/visitors/) | [Campus
Calendar](http://www.olemiss.edu/calendar/) | [About Ole
Miss](http://www.olemiss.edu/hospitality/about/history.html)  
  
---  
  
**_Keyword_ Search**  
[Advanced Search](http://www.olemiss.edu/findit.html)  
---  
  
The University of Mississippi  Outreach and Continuing Education, Independent
Study, The University of Mississippi, Post Office Box 729  
University, MS 38677-0729 / Phone - 662-915-7313 / Fax: 662-915-1221 / email:
indstudy@olemiss.edu  
  
  
| [UM Home](http://www.olemiss.edu) | [UM
Technology](http://www.olemiss.edu/technology/) |
[Sports](http://www.OleMissSports.com/) | [Oxford](http://www.oxfordms.net/) |
[Daily
Mississippian](http://www.thedmonline.com/texis/scripts/vnews/newspaper) |
[About UM Web](http://www.olemiss.edu/depts/it/webproject/)  
Last Modified: Thursday, 27-Jun-2002 10:25:34 CDT  
[Copyright](http://www.olemiss.edu/share/copyright.html)(C) 2000-2002
University of Mississippi. All rights reserved. Webmaster, April E. Johnson,
M.F.A.:[lwaej@olemiss.edu](mailto:lwaej@olemiss.edu)  

