# Problems and Pitfalls in the History of Technology

Steven Dutch, Natural and Applied Sciences, [University of Wisconsin - Green
Bay](http://weba.uwgb.edu/)  
First-time Visitors: Please visit [Site Map and Disclaimer](../sitemap.htm).
Use "Back" to return here.

* * *

Until fairly recently, the history of technology received comparatively little
attention. As a result, a lot of basic questions are unanswered, and in many
cases information has been irretrievably lost. For example, we know the names
of the Pharaohs who ordered the building of the Pyramids, but not the names of
the persons who planned and organized their construction.

## Incomplete Records

### Tendency to Ignore the Mundane

The historical record is incomplete, and that of the history of technology is
even more incomplete than most other types of history. One reason is the
natural human tendency to ignore the mundane. For example, you may have your
grandfather's World War II dress uniform in your attic. If you try to donate
it to a museum, you may find that they have more dress uniforms than they can
use. What museums would dearly love to get are work uniforms. Soldiers save
their dress uniforms when they leave the service; they use their work uniforms
to paint the house, change the oil, and eventually throw them away.

### Elitism and disdain for manual labor

Elitism and disdain for manual labor have seriously skewed the historical
record. For example, there exists a carving of the Persian king Darius on a
throne with turned legs, the first indication in history that somebody has
invented the lathe, one of the most important tools. We know the name of the
king, but not how the lathe was invented, when, or by whom. Until recently,
history has been written by the elite, and they have tended to write about the
elite. For the most part they gave little attention to technical matters, and
in the few cases where they did take an interest, they often did not fully
understand what they recorded. The handful of writers who were both socially
elite and technically knowledgeable, like the Roman military engineer
Vitruvius, are priceless historical sources.

### Secrecy and isolation

Fundamental inventions have probably been invented independently in many
places, simply because slow communication prevented people from knowing what
had been done elsewhere. If an innovation did confer some significant benefit,
the inventor was likely to keep the process secret. Effective patent laws did
not exist until 300 years ago; before then, the only way to keep a competitive
advantage was secrecy. In some cases, the mere existence of a new product
offers clues to its manufacture. In other cases, ideas would slowly diffuse as
assistants and apprentices learned and passed on the techniques. But in
countless cases, inventions went to the grave with their inventors.

### Destruction of Documents

Paper burns, parchment rots, stone erodes. Many documents were preserved or
copied, countless others were not. Even where we have historical records, we
are plagued with uncertain dates, unclear identification of persons, and
unclear descriptions. The familiar Christmas story illustrates the vagaries of
ancient dating. The story begins not with a date but with:

> In the reign of Tiberius Caesar, ......

Several centuries later, after Christianity had become dominant, a monk
decided it would be a good idea to begin the calendar with the birth of
Christ. He correlated the Biblical account with Roman historical records and
got the wrong answer. He was off by 4 to 6 years; Christ was born in 4 to 6
B.C. according to most estimates. We do not know the date of the birth of
Christ (references to shepherds watching their flocks suggest the spring
lambing season), there is no record whatever of Christ's appearance, nor any
exact dating of his death. Many historical identities are vague. Unless they
were from an elite family (like Julius Caesar, for example), most people until
recently did not have last names, and there are many duplicate names in
history. There are, for example, seven Herods in the New Testament. In this
case, Herod is their family name, but they have given names as well and we
know them as distinct individuals.

And this is the state of affairs for the biography of the most discussed
person in history. Imagine the uncertainties for the rest of history.

Even when we do have records, they were often compiled or copied by people who
did not fully understand the subject. Significant facts were often omitted,
and errors crept in. The difficulty of preserving and transmitting words was
nothing compared to the problems of perpetuating pictorial information. If
diagrams were part of the record, they were often distorted.

### Destruction of Artifacts

Iron rusts, cloth and leather and wood rot, glass breaks. The amazing thing,
visiting any large museum, is not that so much has been lost but that anything
is left intact. Chance plays a big role in the preservation of artifacts. Near
the turn of the century, Greek sponge divers seeking refuge from a storm in a
remote cove decided to try their luck diving once the storm subsided. They
found a submerged ancient shipwreck. These same divers were hired to help
salvage the wreck, the first modern underwater archeological excavation. Among
the artifacts brought up were some lumps of corroded bronze which, when
cleaned, turned out to be an ancient geared machine. This device, the
Antikythera Device, is the only complex piece of machinery surviving from
antiquity. It was apparently an astronomical clockwork device for a temple,
made about 80 A.D. If not for the survival of this object, we would have no
idea the ancient world was capable of such mechanical sophistication. (With
two dozen gears, the device is about as complex as an alarm clock, but
nonetheless impressive for an age when all metal parts had to be made by
hand.)

When we do have artifacts, they are as subject to misinterpretation as
documents. Often, we do not know the purpose of an artifact; it may or may not
have been practical. Late American Indian sites throughout the U.S. yield
geometrical stones called "bannerstones" that have been interpreted as fishing
net weights, counterbalances for throwing sticks, and ceremonial objects. The
fact is, nobody knows. If by chance we find some of these objects preserved in
context as they were used, we may solve the riddle. This, incidentally, is the
principal reason professional archeologists detest artifact collectors: they
destroy context information.

How were ancient artifacts made? In the absence of direct information, there
are historians of technology that attempt to reconstruct ancient hunting,
stoneworking, metallurgy, pottery making and other technologies using ancient
methods and materials. Frequently they find that there is some essential step
in the technology that was unsuspected or not preserved in the historical
record.

## Fallacies of Reasoning

Missing data in the historical record can interfere with understanding
history. So can errors of reasoning and hidden biases. Dealing with these
fallacies is complex, because in many cases overcorrecting for the fallacy can
become a fallacy in its own right.

### Oversimplification

Oversimplification is the tendency to reduce complex events to too-simple
terms. A common example: why didn't the ancient world develop powered
technology? Answer: they had slaves to do all the work. So then why did
slavery become entrenched in the American South after the cotton gin made it
possible to harvest American cotton efficiently? How come slavery inhibited
technology in the ancient world but meshed smoothly with technology in
America? Clearly there have to be other factors at work.

A good recent example of oversimplification was the Laffer Curve that
dominated economic policy during the early Reagan presidency. The theory is
that a graph of total government revenue against taxation describes an upside-
down U curve. With no taxes, the government has no revenue. If the government
takes everything, nobody will bother to work and again revenue will be zero.
In between must be a maximum. Reagan's policy makers believed the U.S. was on
the downside of the curve and that decreasing taxes would increase revenue (we
weren't, and it didn't.) The problem with the Laffer curve is not that it's
wrong, but that it's trivial - we know exactly three points on the curve: zero
tax, 100% tax, and where we are now. Short of cloning the United States and
trying many different tax rates (or having a perfect economic computer model,
which is probably even less achievable in practice), we cannot know the shape
of the Laffer Curve (it could easily have several maxima and minima), and we
have no idea if it has the same shape from one day to the next.

However, every intellectual idea of any utility is a simplification. Useful
ideas simplify effectively by stripping away nonessentials and unifying things
that seem to be disparate. The common criticism of ideas as "simplistic" is
bizarre logic: the fact that an idea describes reality simply proves that the
idea must be wrong, and the more effective the idea is, the greater the
evidence that it must be wrong! An oversimplification is bad if it's
erroneous; if it's accurate, then it's not an oversimplification. The Laffer
Curve was bad not because it was simple, but because it led to wrong
conclusions. Simplicity, in itself, is never a valid reason to reject an idea.
Most of the fallacies that follow are variations on oversimplification.

### Determinism or Linear View of History

Determinism or a linear view of history is the notion that history follows
simple patterns driven by some internal, often unstoppable, force. The concept
of Manifest Destiny, widely held by many 19th century Americans, is a good
example. It was America's Manifest Destiny, it was claimed, to expand to the
Pacific (which we did) and even to absorb Canada and Mexico (which we didn't).
Events can have momentum enough to overcome resistance, but it is often
impossible to predict beforehand what chain of events or historical trends
will triumph. Communism looked ominously unstoppable in the 1940's and 1950's,
and Marxist writers were fond of speaking as if Communism was destined to
prevail. People who wrote confidently a couple of decades ago of the eventual
demise of religion are quite disturbed at the resurgence of Christian and
Islamic fundamentalism.

It is very hard to avoid believing that our predecessors somehow knew
everything was going to lead to us. A cartoon shows a man in a modern business
suit surrounded by cavemen. One of the cavemen says "Evolution's been good to
you, Sid". People 500 years ago could not foresee us any more than we can
foresee what things will be like 500 years from now. And they did not think of
themselves as somehow intermediate between the past and the future any more
than we do.

Economics is a common theme of historical determinists. Many historical
determinists are fond of speaking of "epiphenomena" (Greek epi, on). That is,
historical events driven by their particular interest are the "real" phenomena
of history and everything else is superimposed superficially on that backdrop.
For example, an economic determinist might say the Civil War was driven by the
growing economic disparities between the industrial North and the agrarian
South (true) and that moral outrage over slavery was merely an epiphenomenon
(false). The most devastating critique of economic determinism was that by
writer G. K. Chesterton. He wrote that one reason nobody has ever written a
thirteen-volume history of cows is that cows are purely economic creatures,
driven solely by material needs. What makes human history interesting is all
the times humans are driven by unpredictable, even counter-productive forces.

### Does History Follow Patterns?

Another common form of determinism is the notion that history follows
predictable patterns. For example, the historian Arnold Toynbee was famous for
advancing the theory that nations followed a cycle of youth, maturity, and
decline. The theory is trivially true in the sense that everything has a
beginning, a middle and an end, but the actual history of civilzations is far
more complex. China has experienced periods of decline and periods of glory,
but through it all, China is still China.

Even people who think they're historically literate can fall into subtle
variations of historical determinism. One has been termed the Voltairean
theory: the end state of humanity will be a liberal, skeptical, agnostic
civilization in which religion will be regarded as a quaint superstition.
People who subscribe to this theory are sorely perplexed by the rise of the
Religious Right in America or the worldwide Islamic revival. A State
Department Middle East analyst during the 1980's expressed a desire to study
Islam in more detail. He was told "Forget Islam; Marxism is going to dominate
peoples' thinking in the Middle East." Unfortunately, somebody forgot to tell
the Moslems. The imminent wasting away of religion has been predicted so often
that we are entitled to toss that prediction in the proverbial dustbin of
history; religion will be a part of civilization and the human psyche for the
foreseeable future.

Another once-common variant of determinism was the saying "You can't stop
progress"; economic development and technological growth were inevitable and
unstoppable. Disillusionment over problems created by development and
technology have pretty much discredited this notion. However, its social
equivalent, "You can't turn back the clock", is as widely believed as ever.
The implicit assumption is that history is moving in a preordained direction
and any attempt to counter current trends is retrograde. Interestingly enough,
it seems to be only in the social sphere that we cannot turn back the clock.
Nobody continues driving on a flat tire rather than return the tire to a state
of good repair. Most people bathe to return to a state of cleanliness. And the
only way to repair a garbled checkbook is to return to where the error took
place and fix it.

Historians counter determinist theories, especially the more simplistic ones,
with the dictum "history has no predictive value", a statement that is about
75 percent true. The fate of ancient Rome may or may not have parallels with
the fate of America. Nevertheless, if history had no predictive value
whatever, there would be no point in studying it. We live in a universe of
patterns. Some things have been repeated often enough in history that we can
see patterns; there are institutions that work and institutions that don't.
Cultures tend to respond in certain ways to certain kinds of events. One
reason the U.S. was so reluctant to become involved in Bosnia was the clear
historical pattern that occupying Yugoslavia is easy, subduing it is another
matter entirely.

### _Post Hoc ergo Propter Hoc_

_Post Hoc ergo Propter Hoc_ (Latin: after this, therefore because of this) is
often called  "misplaced causality". It is the fallacy that because one event
follows another, the first event must have caused the second. A _Wizard of Id_
cartoon nicely illustrates the fallacy:

> Frog:  "Kiss me and a handsome prince will appear."  
>  (Woman begins kissing frog.)  
>  Handsome Prince (tapping woman on shoulder): "Why are you kissing that
frog?"  
>  Frog (about to be dropped off cliff): "Did I lie to you?"

Sometimes, of course, the causal link is pretty clear. In 1400 there were
perhaps 100,000 books in Europe; by 1500, after the invention of printing,
there were ten million. A 100-fold increase, with its concomitant social
effects, is a little hard to miss. In other cases, the two events may both be
related to some larger cause. For instance, late in the Roman Empire, many
people claimed that the empire was being invaded by barbarians because Rome
had given up its traditional faith and adopted Christianity. Did one event
cause the other, or were both symptoms of deeper- seated problems? Did the
Romans give up their old beliefs, and also lose the will to fight, because
they no longer saw anything worth clinging to? When events happen
concurrently, it is often hard to tell which is the cause and which the
effect. Finally, events may be juxtaposed without any connection. Three of the
most famous geniuses of the Renaissance are Michaelangelo (1475-1564), Galileo
(1564-1642) and Isaac Newton (1642-1727). Surely there must be some
significance in the fact that each was born the exact year the previous one
died. But it's only chance.

However, although things often aren't what they seem, most of the time things
_are_ what they seem. _Post hoc ego propter hoc_ is often a handy excuse for
dismissing inconvenient connections or denying the negative consequences of
social changes. We live in a universe of cause and effect. If two events
follow in sequence, and there's a plausible mechanism to account for the
events, then there likely is some sort of causal connection, and the burden of
proof in such a case is on the person who doubts the causal connection. It's
only legitimate to explore the possibility things are not what they seem after
we've exhausted the possibility that things are what they seem.

### Ethnocentrism

Ethnocentrism is the tendency to project our own cultural biases onto history.
The belief that slavery impeded technology in ancient times is a good example;
we oppose slavery, the ancient world had it, they failed to develop
technology, serves them right. Contrary to _Ben Hur_ , the Romans never used
galley slaves. Stereotypes about the Middle Ages are another example; contrary
to common belief, witchcraft trials were rare in the Middle Ages. Because so
much in that period revolved around religion, the Middle Ages seem very alien
to us. We find the Renaissance much more to our liking. Galley slaves and
witchcraft trials were features of the _Renaissance_ , not the ancient world
or the Middle Ages. We have taken the ugly features of a period we admire and
project them onto other historical periods.

One of the most persistent examples of ethnocentrism is the Flat Earth Error,
the idea that people in the Middle Ages believed the Earth was flat. The
reality is that a knowledge of the spherical Earth was never lost throughout
the Middle Ages and was universal among all educated people. Furthermore,
leading historians have been writing about this error for over a century and
are continually amazed at its persistence. It persists because modern people
_want_ to believe the Middle Ages were a time of abject ignorance and
superstition.

A variant of ethnocentrism that contains elements of determinism as well might
be dubbed _chronocentrism_ , the idea that Twentieth Century values are
inherently superior to those of the past. That is, our values about gender
roles, child rearing, sexual mores, crime and punishment and so on are
naturally superior to those of times past. In some cases, like our opposition
to slavery and torture, we have good reason to believe we are on solid ground.
Also, despite many lapses, we do eventually learn from history. But in many
other cases we dismiss older value systems simply because they interfere with
what we want to do. Our descendants may see things quite differently from us.
What we see as tolerance, other cultures see as moral laziness or cowardice.
What we see as pacifism, other cultures may see as physical cowardice.

##  Historical Revisionism

Now that we are more aware of our biases, it is natural to want to correct
them. Historical revisionism is the term for reinterpretation of history,
especially long-accepted history. In its healthiest form, it is a means of
correcting biases and looking at history from a fresh angle. It is not
surprising, for example, that American Indians might see the arrival of
Columbus differently from European-descended Americans. We view the opening of
the American frontier a lot differently than we did in 1950. In more extreme
cases, though, historical revisionism can be the deliberate substitution of
one set of biases for another. For example, a controversial doctrine called
Afrocentrism holds that the ancient Egyptians were black and that many of the
achievements of the Middle East and Greece actually originated among black
Africans. None of these claims are substantiated by the historical record.
Egyptian wall paintings mostly show people with medium dark skin; in many
paintings blacks are easily recognizable and distinct from Egyptians.

### Debunking

Debunking is a term originally applied to exposure of misconceptions or
errors. However, as practiced today, debunking is mostly junk scholarship. For
example, after author Alex Haley published his epic work _Roots_ , and
especially after it became a celebrated TV series, debunkers swarmed out of
the woodwork to point out weaknesses in Haley's genealogy. Actually, Haley
himself was quite careful in his book to distinguish between documented
evidence and deductions. Debunkers never attack drivel; they attack
constructive work like Haley's. Perhaps the most offensive case is the debate
over whether or not Robert Peary actually reached the North Pole in 1909\.
Rival explorer Frederick Cook, who claimed to have reached the pole in 1908,
committed not just one but several outrageous scientific frauds during his
career, yet Peary is always the focus of the debunkers.

### Reverse Ethnocentrism

Reverse ethnocentrism is the opposite extreme from ethnocentrism: the idea
that all the problems of the world originate in Western values and culture.
For example, Western corporations have been accused of corrupting other
societies through bribery, but in many cultures, it is expected that people in
power will use their power to help their allies, and that a favor from someone
in power demands a gift. These customs have been in place for centuries;
giving a gift to a person of power is not regarded as bribery or unethical.
Using power impartially is not considered responsible in those cultures, but
an irresponsible waste of authority, and neglect of those who depend on you
for protection and assistance.

## Lack of Consensus on Cause and Effect

Lack of consensus on cause and effect plagues many aspects of history. Wholly
apart from the fallacies above, there are a lot of legitimate differences of
opinion on which historical events were causes, which were effects, and
whether one cause or effect was more important than another. For example, was
the Roman Empire fatally weakened by the barbarian invasions, or did the
barbarians invade because Rome was already weakened, or (more likely) was
there a feedback mechanism, in which weakness invited invasion, leading to
further weakness, still more invasion, and so on?

* * *

[Return to Course Syllabus](../westech.htm)  
[Return to Course Notes Index](190outln.htm)  
[Return to Professor Dutch's Home Page](../index.htm)

_Created 13 January 1998, Last Update 21 August 2000_

Not an official UW Green Bay site

