**HIST 103     WORLD CIVILIZATIONS I: to 1000     SPRING 2002**

**Dr. Anthony Steinhoff**



| **Office:** 203 Brock Hall  
**Phone:** 755-4581  
**E-mail:** [Anthony-Steinhoff@utc.edu](mailto:Anthony-Steinhoff@utc.edu)  
**Home page:** [http://www.utc.edu/~asteinho](http://www.utc.edu/%7Easteinho)
|

**Class Hours:** Section 02 MWF 11:00-11:50  
Section 03 MWF 12:00-12:50  
**Office Hours:** MWF 10:00-10:50  
and by appointment  
---|---  
  
**  
  
Course Description**

This is a lecture and discussion course that offers a global perspective on
the past, from prehistoric times to about the year 1000 c.e. Our goal is to
examine major developments in the evolution of societies and cultures across
the globe, paying particular attention to the larger contexts of these
developments and the structures ( _e.g._ economic, military, political,
religious) that promoted interactions between people of different societies.
In taking this approach, we aim to place the contemporary world into a richer
-- and therefore more meaningful -- historical context.

The rise and development of "complex" societies, especially in the Middle
East, Indian Subcontinent, China, Mediterranean basin, and Western Europe,
figure as our primary focus this semester. We will pay special attention to
the cultural, religious, political, social, and economic traditions that
emerged here and their subsequent transformation due to the passage of time
and intercultural contact. Such developments promoted the emergence of what we
call the "classical" societies of the Ancient World, whose values and cultural
creations continue to exercise an enormous influence on today's world. The
final portion of the course probes the decline and reworking of the classical
world, not only in the successor empires of Rome, but also in India and the
Far East.

A major emphasis of the course lies in the development of analytical skills
through reading, thinking and writing about the past. In part, this will take
place through the lectures and discussions. The lectures comment on the
material in the textbook (Bentley), provide additional information not
presented in the text, and provoke you to think about the problems of "doing"
history. This development will also occur through regular engagement with the
sources of the past. Through the "history workshops" and paper assignment, you
will grapple directly with the past. Namely, you will analyze primary sources
and use them as evidence to ask -- and answer -- historical questions.

Every class will provide you chances to raise questions about course material.
An analysis paper and three tests will help me to assess your comprehension
and understanding of the course's major themes. They also provide the primary
means for you to demonstrate progress in thinking and writing about the
world's history.

  

**Required Reading** (available for purchase at the bookstore or via the
internet)

  * Jerry H. Bentley and Herbert F. Ziegler, _Traditions and Encounters: A Global Perspective on the Past,_ Volume A ( = B/Z in the Course Calendar).   

  * Alfred J. Andrea and James H. Overfield, _The Human Record: Sources of Global History_ , vol. 1, 4th edition (= A/O in the Course Calendar; all references refer to the _document_ number, not the page number).   

  * Internet readings, available via my home page (use the link at the top of this page). 

  

**Course Requirements**

  * Regular attendance at lectures. You should plan to complete the readings for the particular day on which they appear in the course calendar (below); this will enable you to follow the lectures and ask useful questions. Lectures assume that you have the knowledge presented in those readings.  

  * Completion of history workshop assignments. An essential part of the class is learning how to "make history" by working with the evidence of the past. You will have a special preparation for each history workshop (HW), which you must write up and submit. There will be ten such assignments over the semester and you may drop one of these without penalty. Under certain circumstances, you may be allowed to make-up a missed assignment of this type. (Total points: 150.) 

            [Evaluation of History Workshop Preparation.](http://www.utc.edu/%7Easteinho/103/HWScores.html)

  * Attendance at and participation in **all** history workshops (see below). You may miss only _one_ of these discussions without prior excuse. I will deduct 15 points for the second through fourth subsequent absence. If you are absent five or more times, you will receive **no** points for the workshop. In order to be counted as present, you must have that day's assigned readings with you (150 points).  

  * A primary source analysis using selected texts from the Andrea/Overfield reader or via the internet. Specific instructions for this assignment will be distributed on 25 February. The paper is due on 8 April. (200 points).  

  * Three in-class examinations, the first two will be worth 150 points each, the last (given on reading day) 200 points. All examinations will include identifications, maps, and essays. 

There are, thus, a total of 1000 possible points. An "A" grade will be 900
points and above a "B" 800-899, a "C" 700-799; and a "D" 600-699.



**Additional Policies**

You must complete **all** papers and tests in order to receive a passing grade
in this course (workshop assignments will be handled in a slightly more
lenient fashion). Late assignments will not be accepted except under special
conditions, which must be approved **in advance of the due date**. I also
reserve the right to alter the means of evaluation if I sense that the class
as a whole is not keeping up. This may be in the form of quizzes.

Make-ups exams will be administered only with documented proof of an
acceptable condition (death in family, arrest warrant, hospitalization, etc.).
All requests (and documentation) for a make-up exam must be presented within
twenty-four (24) hours of the exam date.

I do not award the grade of "I" (incomplete) for this course except under the
most exceptional circumstances. Everyone receives a grade based on what s/he
has earned as of the date of the final exam.

_Your decision to enroll and stay in this course means that you accept the
terms of this syllabus. This includes attending class regularly. It is your
responsibility to make certain that you do so. I can not excuse absences for
lack of planning or for your choice to schedule alternative activities during
regularly scheduled classroom time._

If you are having trouble or wish at any point to discuss a point of interest
or concern, please contact me as soon as possible, either during office hours
or via E-mail. I can also meet you at other mutually convenient times by
special appointment.

  
_ATTENTION: If you are a student with a disability and think that you might
need special assistance or a special accommodation in this class or any other
class, call the Office for Students with Disabilities/College Access Program
at 755-4006 or come by the office, 110 Frist Hall. Examples of disabilities
might include blindness/low vision, communication disorders, deafness/hearing
impairments, emotional/psychological disabilities, learning disabilities, and
other health impairments. This list is not exhaustive._  
  




**COURSE CALENDAR**

****

**Week I: Introduction**

1/7   Course Introduction

1/9   The Origins of Complex Societies; B/Z 7-28.

1/11 Order and Power in the Middle East; B/Z 31-54.

  

**Week II: Early Complex Societies in the Middle East**

1/14 Society and Religion

1/16 Empire and Economy

1/18 _HW1: The Ancient Middle East_ ; A/O Prologue (entire), Documents 2 and
4.  
         HW Prep: Write the responses to Doc 2, Q 1-6 (on p. 13) and Doc 4, Q 1-6 (p. 22).

  

**Week III: Early Complex Societies, cont.**

**1/21 Martin Luther King, Jr. Holiday (No Class)**

1/23 Harappan Society and Aryan India; B/Z 57-79.

1/25 _HW2: Vedic India_ ; A/O 11.  
         HW Prep: 1) Who is the author of Doc 11? 2) What is the form (genre) of Doc 11? What characteristics  
        does this form have? 3) When was Doc 11 written? Plus: Q1-Q5.

  

**Week IV: Early Complex Societies, cont.**

1/28 Civilization in East Asia: The Yellow River Basin; B/Z 79-102.

1/30 Civilization in the Americas andOceania; B/Z 103-24.

2/1 **_First Exam_.  
       [Information for First Exam](http://www.utc.edu/~asteinho/103/1ExamHelp_S2002.html).  
**

  

**Week V: Classical Societies, Southwest and Southern Asia.**

2/4 Classical Societies; The Persian World; B/Z 126-52.

2/6 State and Society in the Persian Empires.

2/8 _HW3: Classical Hinduism and Buddhism_ ; A/O 16, 17, 19.  
      HW Prep: D16 -- 1) What is the source of this text? What do we know about it? Q 1, 3, 4, 7 -- D17: Q1, 2, 4, 5;  
       D19: Q2, 3, 4, 5 (for Q 5 you will need to read the intro to D18).   

**Week VI: Classical Societies, India and China.**

2/11 Imperial India; B/Z 177-198.

2/13 _HW4: Ordering the Chinese Empire_ ; A/O 23-25.  
         HW Prep: D23 - Q1,3,4,6;  D24 - Q 2-5;   D25 Q1-5.

2/15 From Warring States to Han Dynasty: China; B/Z 153-76.

  

**Week VII: Classical Societies, China and the Mediterranean.**

2/18 Society and Culture in Classical China.

2/20 The Greek Polis and its Citizens; B/Z 199-209, 214-223.

2/22 _HW5: The Crisis of Classical Greece_ ; A/O 28, 29 and 30.  
         HW Prep:D29: Q1-3  \--- D30: Q1, Q3, and Q4.

  

**Week VIII: Classical Societies: The Mediterranean World**

2/25 From Hellas to Hellenism; B/Z 209-213.  
  **         _[Distribute Writing Assignment
Instructions](http://www.utc.edu/%7Easteinho/103/PaperAss_S2002.html)_  
         [Model Analysis Paper (using HW5 texts)](http://www.utc.edu/%7Easteinho/103/ModelPaper3.html)**

2/27 Rome: Republic and Early Empire, B/Z 225-48.

3/1 _HW6: Imperial Rome_ ; Quintilian, _[Education of an
Orator](http://www.utc.edu/~asteinho/103/Quintilian.html)_ (internet) and
Juvenal, _[Satires](http://www.utc.edu/~asteinho/103/Juvenal.html) _
(internet).  
      HW Prep: Answer the questions that appear on the documents themselves.

  

**Week IX: The Roman Experience**

3/4 Romans and Christians.

3/6 The Silk Roads and the Decline ofClassical Civilizations; B/Z 249-73.

3/8 **_Second Exam_.**  
       [Information for the Second Exam](http://www.utc.edu/~asteinho/103/2ExamHelp_S2002.html)  
  

  

**Week X: Spring Break**

**3/11-3/15 No Class.**

  

**Week XI: The Post-Classical Era, Byzantium**

3/18 Civilization in the Post-Classical Era; B/Z 279-302.

3/20 Byzantium: Politics and Society.

3/22 _HW7: Byzantine Christianity;_ A/O 82, 86, and Justinian, [_Regulating
Church Ritual_ ](http://www.utc.edu/~asteinho/103/Justinian.html) (Internet).  
         HW Prep: For A/O 82 answer Q 2,3, 4. A/O 86, Q1 and Q3. Questions for the Justinian text appear   
         at the beginning of the document.

  

**Week XII: The Post-Classical Era, Islam**

3/25 Muhammad and the Birth of Islam; B/Z 303-26.

3/27 _HW8: Islam,_ In-Class Video.

3/29 **Official Holiday (no class).**

  

**Week XIII: Post-Classical India and South Asia**

4/1 Order and Economy in the Sub-Continent; B/Z 355-78.

4/3 India and the Indian Ocean Basin.

4/5 _HW9: Religion in Post-Classical Asia_ ; A/O 42-44.  
       HW Prep: D42: Q 1-2; D 43: Q 1, Q 6; D 44: Q 1, Q4.

  

**Week XIV: Post-Classical East Asia**

4/8 The Revival of Empire in China; B/Z 327-54.  
**        ** Analysis Paper Due.**

4/10 A Chinese World? The Chinese and their Neighbors.

4/12 _HW10: Economic Development and Cultural Production in China_ ; A/O 70
and 71.  
         HW Prep: D 70: Q 1, 5; D 71: Q 1, 2, 4.



**Week XV: Post-Classical Western Europe**

4/15 Western Christianity: Monks and Popes; B/Z 379-400.

4/17 The Search for Order: The Franks and Charlemagne.

4/19 Invasion and its Consequences in Western Europe.

  

**Week XVI: The Post-Classical World**

4/22 Course Conclusions.

  

**FINAL EXAM:**

**Section 02 and 03: TUESDAY, APRIL 23, 9:30-11:30 A.M. Place: GROTE 131.**

[**Information for the Final
Exam**](http://www.utc.edu/~asteinho/103/FinalHelp_S2002.html)

**  
**_(NOTE: Thisis not the standard exam time for these class times, but rather
an exceptional arrangement for this course this semester. Also note that the
exam takes place in Grote and not Brock!!)_

[**General Remarks on the Analysis
Papers.**](http://www.utc.edu/~asteinho/103/PaperRems_S2002.html)

