## Technology and Contemporary Life

### HPSS*S576, Spring 2001 -- TR 11:20 to 12:50  
The Rhode Island School of Design, Providence RI  
[Roger B. Blumberg](http://www.cs.brown.edu/~rbb/) \-- Syllabus

**http://www.cs.brown.edu/~rbb/risd/TCL.syllabus.html**  
Updated: 4/10/01

Books || Weekly Descriptions || Additional Bibliography || [Final
Exam](TCL.exam.html)

**Briefly:** Our Age is one in which technology, and digital technology in
particular, is described routinely as having the power not only to accommodate
our desires, enhance our experiences, and expand our abilities, but to
transform the daily life of human societies and redirect the course of
history. In such an Age, what does it mean to understand technology as a
social and historical phenomenon, and how can we best analyze its character,
claims and consequences? In this course, we'll discuss philosophical and
historical interpretations of modern technology (1840-2000), reading works by
Karl Marx, Martin Heidegger, Jacques Ellul, Ellen Ullman, Albert Borgmann, N.
Kathryn Hayles and others, with the goal of deepening our understanding of the
relationship between technology, history, society and character of
contemporary life.

**Requirements:** : The foundation of our work in this course will be our
discussions of the assigned readings, our reflections on our experiences with
technologies, and related writing assignments. Students are expected to read
critically and contribute regularly to class discussions. In addition, each
student is required to keep a journal that includes reactions to, and
analysis, of his/her reading, as well as an account of her/his use of a
technology new to them this semester (these journals will be turned in
periodically during the semester for a "grade"). There will be a final exam.

### Books

**Required Texts** (available in paperback editions at the RISD Bookstore):  

  * Ellul, Jacques. The Technological Society (Random House, 1967). ISBN: 0394703901 
  * Feenberg, Andrew and Hannay, Alistair (editors). Technology and the Politics of Knowledge (Indiana University Press, 1995) ISBN: 0253209404 
  * Hayles, N. Katherine. How We Became Post-Human (University of Chicago Press, 1999) ISBN: 0226321460 
  * Ullman, Ellen. Close to the Machine: Technophilia and Its Discontents (City Lights, 1997) ISBN: 0872863328 

**Recommended Texts** :  

  * Beniger, James R. The Control Revolution: Technological and Economic Origins of the Information Society (Harvard University Press, 1986) 
  * Borgmann, Albert. Technology and the Character of Contemporary Life (University of Chicago Press, 1984). 
  * Cowan, Ruth Schwartz. A Social History of American Technology (Oxford University Press, 1997) 
  * Feenberg, Andrew. Questioning Technology (Routledge, 1999). 
  * Mitcham, Carl and Robert Mackey. Philosophy and Technology: Readings in the Philosophical Problems of Technology (Free Press, 1983) 

We will rely on the World Wide Web for some of the assigned texts, and all
links to the electronic required readings will be part of the electronic
version of the syllabus. There may also be a small reading packet for the
course. The required texts will be on reserve at the RISD library. An
electronic reference page will include additional recommended readings and
reference material.

  

### Additional Bibliography

Baudrillard, Jean. Simulations, trans. Paul Foss, Paul Patton and Philip
Beitchman (Semiotexte, 1983)

Benjamin, Walter. Illuminations, edited by Hannah Arendt, trans. Harry Zohn
(Schocken, 1968/1936) pp. 217-252.

Berry, Wendell. "Why I Am Not Going To Buy A Computer," from What Are People
For? (North Point Press, 1990).

Borgmann, Albert. Holding on to Reality: The Nature of Information at the Turn
of the Millennium. (University of Chicago Press, 1999).

Brook, James, and Boal, Iain. Resisting the Virtual Life: The Culture and
Politics of Information (City Lights, 1995)

Ess, Charles. Philosophical Perspectives on Computer-Mediated Communication
(SUNY Press, 1996).

Feenberg, Andrew. Critical Theory of Technology Oxford University Press, 1991)

Feenberg, Andrew. Questioning Technology (Routledge, 1999).

Heidegger, Martin. The Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays.
(Harper Collins, 1982).

Kargon, Robert H. and Molella, Arthur P. "Culture, Technology and Constructed
Memory in Disney's New Town: Techno-nostalgia in Historical Perspective," in
Cultures of Control, edited by Miram R. Levin (Harwood Academic Publishers,
2000), pp. 135-150.

Kranzberg, Melvin. "The Information Age: Evolution or Revolution?", in Bruce
R. Guile (ed.), Information Technologies and Social Transformation (National
Academy Press, 1985).

Marx, Karl. "The Meaning of Human Requirements," in Economic and Philosophical
Manuscripts of 1844, edited by Dirk J. Struik, trans. by Martin Milligan
(International Publishers, 1964), pp. 147-164.

Moser, Mary Anne, with Douglas McLeod. Immersed in Technology: Art and Virtual
Environments (MIT, 1995)

Mumford, Lewis. Art and Technics (Columbia University Press, 2000/1952)

Pacey, Arnold. Meaning in Technology (MIT, 1999)

Scheffler, Israel. "Computers at School?" in In Praise of the Cognitive
Emotions and Other Essays in the Philosophy of Education (Routledge, 1991),
pp. 80=96.

Tenner, Edward. Why Things Bite Back: Technology and the Revenge of Unintended
Consequences (Knopf, 1996)

Weizenbaum, Joseph. Computer Power and Human Reason (W.H. Freeman, 1976)

### Weekly Schedule

**Week #1 (February 22): Introduction to the course**  
Why a course on _technology_ and contemporary life, as opposed to one about
_politics_ , _art_ , or _science_ and contemporary life? We'll review the
syllabus and course requirments, and then find out what prompted people to
sign up for this course.

**Week #2 (February 27 and March 1): Technophilia and Its Discontents**  
Krantzberg (1985) wrote "Technology is neither good nor bad, but neither is it
neutral," and we'll begin with a discussion of how Ullman's book comments on
that remark. We'll spend the week using Ullman's text to articulate our own
questions concerning technology that we hope to answer and develop during the
semester.

**Required Reading:** Ullman 1997 (chapters 0-4 for Tuesday, and the rest for
Thursday)

  * [Blumberg's Notes](TCL.rbb1.html)

**Classes cancelled on March 6th due to snow.**

**Week #3 (March 8, 13 & 15): Technology and Humanity I**  
We'll begin the week with a discussion of the significance of material
culture, following up on issues raised in the Ullman book, and then we'll turn
to the remarkable section of Marx' 3rd Manuscript in which he writes "The
machine accomodates itself to the weak human being, in order to turn the weak
human being into a machine." What are questions concerning technology (really
questions) about?

**Required Reading:** Borgmann 1995 (in  TPK), Marx 1844 ( [an excerpt from
the 3rd Manuscript](KM1844.needs.html))

  * [Blumberg's Notes](TCL.rbb2.html) 

**Week #4 (March 20 & 22): Technology and Society I**:  

**Required Reading:** Ellul 1967, chapters 1, 2 and 6.

[Forsstroom's Notes on Chapter 2](TCL.hf1.html)

[Kennedy's Notes on Chapter 6](TCL.kk1.html)

**Spring Break: March 27 & 29**

**Week #6 (April 3 & 5): Technology and Humanity II**  

**Required Reading:** Longino (Tuesday) and Henaff (Thursday) (in  TPK)

[Ragan's Notes on Longino 1995](TCL.jr1.html)

**Week #7 (April 10 & 12): What Heidegger Thought I**  

**Required Reading:** Heidegger 1977, pt. I for Thursday (electronic version
at <http://www.centenary.edu/~balexand/cyberculture/questiontech.html>)  
**Assignment:** On Tuesday come prepared to speak for 5 minutes or so about
the technology you've adopted this semester.

**Week #8 (April 17 & 19): What Heidegger Thought II**  

**Required Reading:** Dreyfus 1995, Winograd 1995, Rockmore 1995 (all in  TPK)

**Week #9 (April 24 & 26): Enter the Computer**  

**Required Reading:** Weizenbaum 1976 (Introduction and chapter 4 for Tuesday,
and Chapter 10 for Thursday)  
**Assignment:** All journals are due in class on the 24th. They will be
returned with comments on the 26th.

**Week #10 (May 1 & 3):The Human and the Mechanical**  

**Required Reading:** Benjamin 1936, Tijmes 1995 (in  TPK)

**Week #11 (May 8 & 10): The Human and the Virtual I**  

**Required Reading:** Hayles 1999, prologue and chapters 1  & 2\.

**Week #12 (May 15 & 17): The Human and the Virtual II**

**Required Reading:** Hayles 1999, chapters 8, 10  & 11\.

**Week #13 (May 22): Technology and Contemporary Life**  

  * [Quotations for Final Exam Review](TCL.review.html) 

**May 25th:[Final Exam](TCL.exam.html)**

### Contact Information

My office at RISD is 206 Carr House, and my scheduled office hour is Monday
11-12 a.m. and Wednesday from 6-7 p.m. I am most easily reached by e-mail
(rbb@brown.edu) or at my office at Brown (502 CIT, 863-7619), and I am happy
to schedule additional office hours if requested.

* * *

(C) 2001 Roger B. Blumberg

