![Duke University Libraries](/images/2ndarybnr.jpg) |  |
![](virginislands_map.jpg)  
---  
  
## CARIBBEAN STUDIES

**

Hortensia Calvo  
021 Perkins Library  
(919) 660-5845**  
**[hcalvo@duke.edu](mailto:hcalvo@acpub.duke.edu) **

(See also the web page for [Latin America, Spain and
Portugal](http://www.lib.duke.edu/ias/latamer/index.htm))  
  
**Resources on this page **  
Programs of Study at Duke  | Resources and Guides

**Internet Resources on the Caribbean Region**  
Gateways and Search Engines  | Library Collections

[Recent Acquisitions](http://www.lib.duke.edu/ias/booklist.htm)

* * *

![](gateonyellowwall.jpg) |

**Programs of Study at Duke University**

**and**

**Resources and Guides at Perkins Library  
**  
---|---  
  
**Programs of Study at Duke University**

  *   [Duke Council on Latin American Studies](http://www.duke.edu/web/las)
  *   [Duke - UNC Program in Latin American Studies](http://www.duke.edu/web/las/duke-unc.html)
  *   [African and Afro-American Studies Program](http://www.duke.edu/web/africanameric/)
  *   [Romance Studies Department](http://www.duke.edu/web/romance)
  *   [Comparative Area Studies Program](http://www.duke.edu/web/CAS/)
  *   [Duke in Cuba](http://www.lib.duke.edu/ias/latamer/cuba.html)

**Resources and Guides at Perkins Library**

  * [Researching Latin America at Duke: Basic Library Resources](/ias/latamer/guide.htm)* 
  * [Finding Aid for Journals on Latin America](/ias/latamer/find.htm)* 
  * [Latin America, Iberia and the Caribbean--Sources of Information in Electronic Databases](/ias/latamer/cddata.htm)
  * [Spanish, Latin American, Brazilian, and Caribbean Literature](/ias/latamer/lit.htm)
  * [Latin American and Iberian Books, 15th-19th Centuries](/ias/latamer/labooks.htm)* 
  * [Recent Acquisitions at Perkins Libraries](/ias/booklist.htm)
  * [LST 200 Syllabus](/ias/latamer/200syl.htm) \-- Research Methods and Bibliographic Instruction in Latin American & Caribbean Studies 

* These sources contain material on the Caribbean

* * *

**Internet Resources on the Caribbean Region**

|

![](LL001263.jpg)  
---|---  
  
**Gateways & Search Engines**

[UT-LANIC Latin American Network Information Center](http://lanic.utexas.edu/)  
The University of Texas' LANIC page is the best single site for links,
especially to academic resources, to the major Caribbean nations. Countries
include, [Antigua and Barbuda](http://www.lanic.utexas.edu/la/cb/ab/),
[Aruba](http://www.lanic.utexas.edu/la/cb/other/aruba/),
[Bahamas](http://www.lanic.utexas.edu/la/cb/bahamas/),
[Barbados](http://www.lanic.utexas.edu/la/cb/barbados/), [ Cayman
Islands](http://www.lanic.utexas.edu/la/cb/other/ci/),
[Cuba](http://www.lanic.utexas.edu/la/cb/cuba/),
[Dominica](http://www.lanic.utexas.edu/la/cb/dominica/), [ Dominican
Republic](http://www.lanic.utexas.edu/la/cb/dr/),
[Grenada](http://www.lanic.utexas.edu/la/cb/grenada/),
[Guadeloupe](http://www.lanic.utexas.edu/la/cb/other/guad/),
[Haiti](http://www.lanic.utexas.edu/la/cb/haiti/),
[Jamaica](http://www.lanic.utexas.edu/la/cb/jamaica/),
[Martinique](http://www.lanic.utexas.edu/la/cb/other/martin/), [ Puerto
Rico](http://www.lanic.utexas.edu/la/cb/other/pr/), [ St. Kitts &
Nevis](http://www.lanic.utexas.edu/la/cb/stkitts/), [ St.
Lucia](http://www.lanic.utexas.edu/la/cb/stlucia/), [ Trinidad &
Tobago](http://www.lanic.utexas.edu/la/cb/tt/), [Virgin
Islands](http://www.lanic.utexas.edu/la/cb/other/vi/). LANIC can be searched
by [ country](http://www.lanic.utexas.edu/subject/countries.html), by
[region](http://www.lanic.utexas.edu/la/region/caribe/) or by subject.

[MIT Caribbean Index](http://www.mit.edu:8001/activities/caribbean/index.html)
\- This is a site prepared and maintained by the Caribbean Club at MIT. It has
an extensive list of Caribbean student associations and of Caribbean academic
institutions and media outlets.

Caribbean resources in [Internet Resources for Latin America
](http://lib.nmsu.edu/subject/bord/laguia/) For many years now, Molly Molloy
at New Mexico State University Library has done us all a great service by
creating and maintaining this very diverse and well administered list of
resources on Latin America. There are many Caribbean resources included.

[CaribSeek](http://www.caribseek.com/) -At this writing, the most
comprehensive search engine located in the Caribbean is CaribSeek. Although
some categories at CaribSeek are not yet linked to sites, the framework is
there to build a comprehensive system as sites are activated or existing sites
make links.

**___________________________________________________________________________________**

    
    
    ![](doubl_marr.jpg)

|

**Collections in the:**

**United States, Caribbean, & United Kingdom**  

"Double marriage a la cathedrale" by Jacques Botte, Haiti  
---|---  
  
**The United States**

While both Duke University and The University of  North Carolina - Chapel Hill
(UNC) collect Caribbean and Latin American materials at the general level, a
cooperative collecting agreement between the two institutions places primary
responsibility for the English and Dutch-speaking Caribbean countries at Duke
and for the Spanish and French-speaking Caribbean countries at UNC. The
Duke/UNC agreement also applies to collecting of Latin American materials,
with Duke being the primary collection for material from/about Bolivia,
Brazil, Central America, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Mexico, Peru and Suriname,
and UNC maintaining a primary collection for materials from/about Argentina,
Chile, Panama, Paraguay, Uruguay and Venezuela. To obtain the most
comprehensive search results, start your search at the [Duke University Online
Catalog](http://www.lib.duke.edu/online_catalog.html),  but  be sure to
consult the[ University of North Carolina Online
Catalog](http://www.lib.unc.edu/) as well.

  
_[Florida International University (FIU) Library
Catalog](http://www.fiu.edu/~library/)_ \- FIU has a long-standing connection
with Caribbean Studies and the library reflects these interests. Conference
proceedings and additional Caribbean information can also be found at FIU's
[Florida Caribbean Center](http://lacc.fiu.edu/fci/), the FIU [Cuban Research
Institute](http://lacc.fiu.edu/cri/) and a series of other institutes and
centers working on various academic themes. These various groups are
organizationally united in the [Latin American and Caribbean
Center](http://lacc.fiu.edu/) where further links can be found.

_Georgetown University's Library System_ hosts the [Political Database of the
Americas](http://www.georgetown.edu/pdba/). - The site contains information on
the institutional, constitutional and political structures of the Caribbean
and Latin America. Primary and secondary political documents and
bibliographies on many Caribbean countries are included. Georgetown's
[Caribbean
Project](http://www.georgetown.edu/sfs/programs/clas/Caribe/main.htm) also
contains papers presented at various conferences and lectures at Georgetown.

[The New York Public Library Catalog](http://www.nypl.org/) - CATNYP is the
online catalog of The Research Libraries of The New York Public Library. This
catalog only includes materials added to the collections after 1971, as well
as some materials acquired before 1971. At this time most of the Libraries'
holdings are still found in the **800 volume[Dictionary Catalog of The
Research Libraries](http://catnyp.nypl.org/screens/dictcat.html), published by
G.K. Hall**.

[The University of Florida, Smathers Library Catalog
](http://web.uflib.ufl.edu/lac/) -  UF's Latin American Collection contains
approximately 335,000 volumes, 1,100 current/active serial titles, some 50,000
microforms, and a growing amount of computer-based information and access.
There is particular emphasis on the Caribbean and Brazil,. The Latin American
Collection is one of a small number in the United States that is housed
separately and that maintains its own reading room and reference services.
**Note: When accessing this site, if a dialog box appears asking for an ID and
password, click on cancel and it will let you into the library.  **  
  
[The University of Miami, Richter Library Catalog](http://ibisweb.miami.edu/)
\- The Otto G. Richter Library's general collection has a focus on the
Caribbean as well as an excellent Special Collection on Cuba and the Cuban
Diaspora. [The Cuban Collection](http://www.library.miami.edu/chc/chc.html)
includes approximately 45,000 volumes of books (both rare and contemporary),
plus significant journals,  periodicals, bibliographies, indexes and personal
and corporate papers. The site also presents a variety of marvelous exhibits.

**__________________________________________________________________________________**

**The Caribbean**

Jorge Tadeo Lozano University, [Caribbean
Campus](http://www.utadeo.investigaciones.8m.com), Cartagena de Indias,
Colombia - The Research Department has current social and economic development
studies on the South American zone of the Caribbean. These include works on
environmental topics as well as recent demographics and commercial analysis
and planning.

_The University of Puerto Rico (UPR) has several campuses with special Puerto
Rican and/or Caribbean library collections. These include_ \- The **Cayey**
campus which houses the [Centro de Documentacion Sala Luisa Capetillo and the
Puerto Rican Collection.
](http://http://wwwcuc.upr.clu.edu/biblioteca/Colecciones.htm)The former
contains material on Women's Studies in the Caribbean and the latter
specializes in Puerto Rican jurisprudence. The **Mayag?ez** campus, which
houses [the Manuel Mar?a Sama y Auger Collection, including books and articles
from journals, magazines, and newspapers, written by Puerto Rican authors and
about Puerto Rico.](http://www.uprm.edu/library/collections.html#P.R.) The
**Rio Piedras** campus, which has both a [Puerto Rican
Collection](http://upracd.upr.clu.edu:9090/~sisbib/index2.html) and a separate
[Regional Library for the Caribbean and Latin
America.](http://upracd.upr.clu.edu:9090/~sisbib/index2.html) (For the P.R.
Collection. click on Colecciones. For the Regional Library, click on
Bibliotecas). The Rio Piedras campus is the largest of the libraries and
special collections in the UPR system.

_The University of the Virgin Islands (UVI)-[ St. Croix & St. Thomas - Special
Collections - Caribbean Collection](http://library.uvi.edu/RESO.HTM)_. The UVI
collection contains the: **Caribbean Collection** \- Materials pertaining to
the civilization, history and literature of the area; **Melchior Center for
Recent History** \- Books, papers, pictures and other material about the
recent history of the Virgin Islands (Some of these materials have been
scanned onto computer files for downloading); **Caspar Holstein Collection**
\- Books on African and African-American culture and history; **Charles
William Taussig Memorial Collection** \- Books on African-American and
Caribbean culture.

_The University of the West Indies -[ Trinidad & Tobago - St. Augustine - West
Indiana Collection](http://www.mainlib.uwi.tt/wisc.html)_.  This is a research
collection of material about the West Indies by West Indians and published in
the West Indies. The collection has been organized for the specific purpose of
ensuring that material concerning the West Indies is preserved for the use of
present and future researchers. There are three sections in this division:
**The Main Collection** covering all subjects, contains the first copy of each
title acquired on the West Indies, by West Indian authors and those published
in the West Indies. The collection contains books, pamphlets, serials, theses,
newspapers, maps, photographs, microforms and other formats. **The Rare Books
Collection  ** is housed in a separate room and contains a collection of books
and pamphlets donated by the Historical Society numbering one to one thousand.
Other old and rare publications are also housed there. **The Special
Collections** constitute a separate category of materials within the West
Indiana and Special Collections Division. These are unpublished source
materials (personal papers, archival materials, manuscripts) as well as books
and other special types of materials.  
  
_The University of the West Indies -[ Jamaica - Mona Campus - West Indies &
Caribbean Collection](http://wwwlibrary.uwimona.edu.jm:1104/)_. The West
Indies  & Caribbean Collection includes books from the English speaking as
well as the Spanish, French and Dutch Caribbean territories. The collection
consists of a variety of smaller collections including: **Rare Book
Collection:** containing old and rare books and pamphlets. **Manuscript
collections** : including diaries, estate journals, land transfers, letters,
Ships' logs on the West Indies, literary manuscripts. **West Indian Creative
writing (XX collection) :** Anthologies, novels, plays and poetry from the
English-speaking Caribbean retained in mint condition including autographed
copies. **Map collection:** Rare and twentieth century maps. **Microform
Collection** : extensive collection of official documents, manuscripts,
periodicals and newspapers. **Treasures from the Library:** **Literary
manuscripts** of West Indian authors, of which the major holdings are the
manuscripts of **Roger Mais** , Jamaican novelist, journalist and critic.
Other writers represented include **Michael Anthony** , **Wilson Harris** ,
**Orlando Patterson** and **Derek Walcott, John Hearne, Erna Brodber.**
**Photographs** of the University of the West Indies including views from the
1950's which capture and document its early history and development.
**Prints** include Album Pintoresco de la isla Cuba, a rare and valuable
volume of coloured prints depicting nineteenth century Cuba

_____________________________________________________________________________________

**The United Kingdom (U.K.)**

In general, the U.K. has a highly decentralized system of libraries.
Traditionally, faculties or even individual professors have held valuable
collections in their schools, institutes or personal offices. These
collections are gradually being united in cyberspace through several, recent,
electronic, library initiatives.

_The British Library_ has an extensive collection on the Caribbean that is
currently found in their [card catalogue](http://opac97.bl.uk) and in the
[Hispanic/Latin American](http://www.bl.uk/collections/collections_main.html)
Collection. The Caribbean is not identified as a separate collection. The
British Library has the largest collection on Latin America in the United
Kingdom, containing material on all humanities and social science topics and
periods and on all the countries of Latin America and the English and Spanish-
speaking Caribbean. NOTE: The British Library online catalogue will change in
2001 but they have promised that Internet access will be uninterrupted.

[_COPAC_](http://www.copac.ac.uk/copac/), a recently merged catalogue of
nineteen major University Libraries throughout the UK, is an important,
centralized source (COPAC is a trademark of the Victoria University of
Manchester).

_The Institute for Commonwealth Studies Library_ , which is part of the School
of Advanced Studies at The University of London, has two interesting sites:
The [Commonwealth Caribbean and Central America Archives
](http://www.sas.ac.uk/commonwealthstudies/library/libcaribbean.html)and the
[CASBAH](http://www.sas.ac.uk/commonwealthstudies/archives/casbah.html)
Project. The chief aim of the CASBAH Project is to identify and map national
research resources for Caribbean studies and the history of Black and Asian
people in Britain.

The main library at _[Th](http://www.sas.ac.uk/ilas/bg-ul.htm)_[ _e University
of London_  ](http://www.sas.ac.uk/ilas/bg-ul.htm) (UL) also contains a
helpful list of collections within the University's decentralized special
collections. Several of these libraries have Caribbean components.
Additionally, UL contains an excellent page leading to [Latin American and
Caribbean Resources Outside of The University of
London.](http://www.sas.ac.uk/ilas/bg-nonul.htm) Other links on that page will
lead you to Resources in London (courtesy of the Institute of Latin American
Studies at UL) and Resources Worldwide (via LANIC).

____________________________________________________________________________________

    
    
    ![](fish2.jpg)
    
    
    
    "Sirene" by Enick Brice. Paintings reproduced with permission of [www.artnoir.com](http://www.artnoir.com) 

* * *

![](globe.gif)[**IAS Home Page**](http://www.lib.duke.edu/ias/index.html)

 **We welcome comments and questions about our website.  
 Please address e-mail enquiries and suggestions to:**
**[hcalvo@duke.edu](mailto:hcalvo@duke.edu) or via conventional mail at:  
INTERNATIONAL AND AREA STUDIES DEPARTMENT**  
Box 90195 -- 021 Perkins Library -- Duke University -- Durham, NC  27708 --
919/660-5817

Map: Used with permission of [
www.mapsandprints.com](http://www.mapsandprints.com). Photos: Gate on Yellow
Wall, St. Croix, Virgin Islands; Charlottesville Library,  Trinidad Tobago
purchased from [www.corbis.com](http://www.corbis.com)  Paintings: "Double
marriage a la cathedrale" by Jacques Botte; & "Sirene" by Enick Brice. Both
paintings reproduced with permission of
[www.artnoir.com](http://www.artnoir.com)  
---  
  
* * *

Page Author: Holly Ackerman [  
Perkins Library](http://www.lib.duke.edu/)  
[Duke University](http://www.duke.edu/)  
Durham, NC, USA  
Last Revision: Monday, 10-Sep-2001 11:30:18 EDT1/2001/H. Ackerman  
<http://www.lib.duke.edu/ias/pmg.html>  

