    


##  `History of English Studies Page`

> _"If literary criticism is ever to conceptualize a new disciplinary domain,
it will have to undertake first a much more thorough reflection on the
historical category of literature; otherwise I suggest that new critical
movements will continue to register their agendas symptomatically, by ritually
overthrowing a continually resurgent literariness and literary canon. At the
same time it is unquestionably the case that several recent crises of the
literary canon--its 'opening' to philosophical works, to works by minorities,
and now to popular and mass cultural works--amounts to a terminal crisis, more
than sufficient evidence of the urgent need to reconceptualize the object of
literary study."  _  
> \-- John Guillory, _Cultural Capital: The Problem of Literary Canon
Formation_ (1993)

This page and its
[rationale](http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/users/raley/english/rationale.html) were
authored by [Rita Raley](http://english.cla.umn.edu/Faculty/RALEY/RALEY.HTM)
in 1995. There are primary documents on site by Thomas B. Macaulay; John Henry
Newman; Adam Sedgwick; Hutcheson Macaulay Posnett; Mary Wollstonecraft;
Raymond Williams; Gayatri Spivak; Gauri Viswanathan; D.J. Palmer; Chris
Baldick; Franklin Court; Brian Massumi; Avital Ronell; and others. These pages
are fully
[searchable](http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/users/raley/english/ghindex.html).

Last revised:  August 4, 1998

* * *

`**Related Web Pages of mine:**  `

  * A [Bibliography](http://english.cla.umn.edu/Faculty/RALEY/research/biblio.html) for the History of English Studies
  * [What Is Global English?](http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/users/raley/global-English.html)
  * [Anthologies and Miscellanies: A Web Project with Online Table of Contents](http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/depts/english/research/grad/anthologies) (with Laura Mandell)
  * [The Anthologies Page](http://www.rc.umd.edu/reference/anthologies/anthologies.html) (a division of _[Romantic Circles](http://www.rc.umd.edu/)_ ; with Harriet Linkin and Laura Mandell)

  

* * *

`**Catalogue of Primary Documents:**  `

![](whitebal.gif)Adam Sedgwick, _[A Discourse on the Studies of the
University](http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/users/raley/english/Sedgwick.html)_
(1833)  

> Excerpt taken from part 2, on the study of ancient literature and the need
to make the study of languagues a part of our earliest study, so as to gain
access to the "intellectual treasures of a nation." Sedgwick also stresses
that the function of the university is to "teach profoundly" not
superficially.

![](whitebal.gif)Hutcheson Macaulay Posnett, _[Comparative
Literature](http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/users/raley/english/Posnett.html)_
(1886)  

> After receiving four requests for information about Posnett (which I take to
be quite a few), and given the text's  virtual unavailability, I decided to
mount a few excerpts from the sections on "world-literature" and "national
literature." The text is public domain, but so few copies exist that xeroxing
is basically out of the question; thus I have had to select passages that I
think most relevant to the historical foundations of comparative literature.

![](whitebal.gif)John Henry Newman, [The Idea of a
University](http://www.cco.caltech.edu/~newman/idea-uni.html) (from the
Introduction and Discourses 3 and 4; Newman Center at Caltech)

![](whitebal.gif)D.J. Palmer, ["An Education for the Industrial
Classes"](http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/users/raley/english/palmer.html) and ["The
Muse in
Chains"](http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/users/raley/english/palmer.html#muse) from
_The Rise of English Studies_ (1965)  

![](whitebal.gif)Franklin Court,
["Introduction"](http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/users/raley/english/court.html) to
_Institutionalizing English Literature: The Culture and Politics of Literary
Study, 1750-1900_ (1992)  

![](whitebal.gif)Chris Baldick, _[The Social Mission of English Criticism
1848-1932](http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/users/raley/english/baldick.html)_ (1983)  

![](whitebal.gif)[Mary
Wollstonecraft](http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/projects/pack/rom-
chrono/links-w.htm#wollstonecraft), _[The Female
Reader](http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/users/raley/english/female_reader.html)_ :
or Miscellaneous pieces in Prose and Verse: Selected from the Best Writers,
and Disposed under Proper Heads: for the Improvement of Young Women (1789)

![](whitebal.gif)[Raymond Williams](http://press-
gopher.uchicago.edu:1995/CGI/cgi-bin/hfs.cgi/99/chicago/12870.ctl), ["The
Future of English
Literature,"](http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/users/raley/english/williams.html)
(1983) from _What I Came to Say_ (1989)  

> Written two years after the "crisis" at Cambridge, this is quite a nice
reflection on the continuing controversies within English studies. Williams
uses an anecdote of a friend's impermissible utterance at an "open" encounter
group (in California, no less) both to provide an analogy for the limits
contained within a syllabus and to argue that, in the case of a debate over
syllabus reform, one must say the unutterable and wrest one's interlocutors
out of their particular language game. Also interesting is Williams' use of
the figure of a palimpsest-like map of English literature, one that contains
layers of a "selective tradition" carved out by generations of scholars. The
"substratum" of this imagined map is the crucial issue of the English
language.

![](whitebal.gif)Gayatri Spivak, ["Reading the World: Literary Studies in the
Eighties,"](http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/users/raley/english/spivak.html) (1985)

> Excerpts from an essay collected in _In Other Worlds_ (1987). Interesting to
me in that critical reading and pedagogy become the means of fusing "theory"
and the "practical-historical"; teaching literature, then, means teaching
students to "read the world." Great metaphor describing teachers of
literature: "the disc jockeys of an advanced technocracy" (with the illusion
that we're free to play), which she'll carry over to "Explanation and Culture"
in the same volume. (96)  

![](whitebal.gif)Thomas B. Macaulay, ["Minute on Indian
Education,"](http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/users/raley/english/macaulay.html)
(February 1835)

> Long considered the text that put the nail in the coffin, so to speak, and
directly caused the shift in official British educational policy in India
(then Governor-General Lord Bentinck did issue a resolution in March 1835,
declaring that English literature and language were to be taught to the
"natives"), Macaulay's Minute was actually one of many documents written in
the 45 or so years of the Orientalist-Anglicist controversy. I think its fame
derives partly from its rhetoric and partly from both its positioning (near
the end) and Macaulay's (1800-1859) fame at the time it was published (it
wasn't registered in the government office in Bengal until 1862, after which
Sir George Trevelyan presumably copied it, or received it from someone who
copied it, and sent it off to a London magazine). But, this is speculation; it
is still important in terms of the history of English studies.

![](whitebal.gif)Gauri Viswanathan, [Masks of Conquest: Literary Study and
British Rule in
India](http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/users/raley/english/masks.html), (1989)

> Now acknowledged as the definitive study of the "origins" of English
Studies, _Masks_ firmly locates these origins in their colonial context and
argues that the humanizing and civilizing mission widely accepted to be at the
heart of the disipline was absolutely bound up with the civilizing mission in
British India. English studies, then, played a central role in the British
efforts to institute and maintain hegemonic control over the "natives." One
could extract and say that [writing](http://the-
tech.mit.edu/Classics/Plato/phaedrus.body.html) and violence are ever-
interwoven.

![](whitebal.gif)[Michel
Foucault](http://WWW.CSUN.Edu/~hfspc002/foucault.html), ["What Is an
Author?"](http://www.georgetown.edu/irvinemj/english016/texts/foucault.html)

> Excerpts on the "author-function"

![](whitebal.gif)Brian Massumi, ["Translator's Foreword: Pleasures of
Philosophy"](http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/users/raley/english/massumi.html)
(1987)

> From his introduction to Deleuze and Guattari's _A Thousand Plateaus_ ,
these excerpts point to the example of the University of Berlin in order to
make explicit the connections between philosophy and the State. As far as I
know, Deleuze and Guattari do not specifically address the university per se
in _ATP_ , but Massumi is here connecting the idea of "State thought" to
Lyotard's discussion of the university from _The Postmodern Condition_
(another major translation of his). I've included footnotes -- a rare treat --
because of the great insult to Habermas.  

![](whitebal.gif)[Friedrich
Nietzsche](http://www.usc.edu/dept/annenberg/thomas/nietzsche.html), ["We
Scholars"](http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/users/raley/english/we_scholars.html)
from _Beyond Good and Evil_ (1886)  

![](whitebal.gif)[Avital
Ronell](http://www.altx.com/interviews/avital.ronell.html), ["The Worst
Neighborhoods of the Real: Philosophy - Telephone -
Communication"](http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/users/raley/english/ronell.html)
from _Finitude's Score: Essays for the End of the Millennium_ (1994).  

> It would have been difficult indeed to pass over this piece once I read this
sentence: "Philosophy's invasion of literature took place when the border
patrol was out having a cigarette." These excerpts for the most part loosely
address the rhetoric of contamination used to circumscribe the events of
philosophy's supposed fall from the pristine ivory towers (de Man and
Heidegger). As Ronell notes, one of the dreams of the academy is to contain
the infection and leakage by "shutting down the flow."

![](whitebal.gif)Samuel Johnson, [Preface to his Edition of Shakespeare's
Plays](http://library.utoronto.ca/www/utel/rp/criticism/johns_il.html) (1765;
U Toronto)

![](whitebal.gif)William Wordsworth, [Lyrical Ballads: Advertisement and
Preface](http://www.english.upenn.edu/~mgamer/Romantic/lbprose.html) (Michael
Gamer)

![](whitebal.gif)[Prose and Verse Criticism of
Poetry](http://library.utoronto.ca/www/utel/rp/indexcriticism.html) (UToronto)

![](whitebal.gif)Matthew Arnold, [The Function of Criticism at the Present
Time](http://library.utoronto.ca/www/utel/rp/criticism/funct_il.html) (1865; U
Toronto)

![](whitebal.gif)[Adam Smith](http://www.efr.hw.ac.uk/EDC/edinburghers/adam-
smith.html), [Lectures on Rhetoric and Belles
Lettres](http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/users/raley/english/smith.html) (1762-63)

* * *

**`Other English Studies Pages:`**

![](whitebal.gif)[European History of English Studies](http://www.mshs.univ-
poitiers.fr/esse/ehes/eheshome.htm) (Balz Engler & Renate Haas)

`**Technology and English Studies:**  `

![](whitebal.gif)English Studies and Technology [English Studies
Links](http://www.wco.com/~ejia/eduframe.htm) (E.J. Inglis-Arkell)  
![](whitebal.gif)[Computing Resources for English Studies: An
Introduction](http://info.ox.ac.uk/departments/humanities/englishit.html)  
![](whitebal.gif)Technical information relevant to Oxford University, but
there are a few good lists of resources: [Online texts and
archives](http://users.ox.ac.uk/~humbul/); [Internet
Libraries](http://info.ox.ac.uk/departments/humanities/lib.html); and
[Electronic Journals and Bulletin
Boards](http://info.ox.ac.uk/departments/humanities/bul.html)

* * *

  
  
---  
| [![Gorey
Galoshes](Galoshes.jpg)](http://english.cla.umn.edu/Faculty/Raley/RALEY.htm)**
Rita Raley** | [Dept of English](http://english.cla.umn.edu/)  
[University of Minnesota](http://www.umn.edu)  
[raley@tc.umn.edu](mailto:raley@tc.umn.edu)  
---|---  
"Today, how can we not speak of the university?"  
\-- Jacques Derrida, "The Principle of Reason: The University in the Eyes of
Its Pupils"  
     
![](copyrigh.gif) Rita Raley

  
Page Created:  May 1995, while a graduate student in
[English](http://www.english.ucsb.edu/) at the [University of California,
Santa Barbara](http://www.ucsb.edu).  
    
    


