![University of Delaware](/images/Logos/UDlogo75.gif)

##  BUAD309 - Management and Organizational Behavior

###  Fall 1995 (95F) - Section 16

####  Instructor: [ Dr. Diane L. Ferry ](ferryd.html)  
[ ferryd@college.be.udel.edu ](mailto:ferryd@college.be.udel.edu)

    
    
    Office Hours:  TWR 8:30-9:00 a.m.
                   Other times, as available or by appointment
                   Available MTWRF via e-mail.
    
    Please note:  I will use E-mail to communicate with the class &
    individuals.
    We will have a news group and WWW pages which we will also use
    actively.
    
    Required Text:  
         Robbins, Steven P. _Management_ , 4th Edition.  Englewood
    Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1994.
    
    Recommended Texts:
    1.   _Using Electronic Communication on UNIX Systems_. 
    University of Delaware, CNS User Services, September, 1993.
    
    2.   You should also have access to at least one business
    publication; I recommend the _Wall Street Journal_ ,
    _BusinessWeek_ , or _Fortune_.  There are numerous others,
    including specialized trade publications, which are satisfactory. 
    The point is to **regularly** read the business press.
    
    
    
    Course Goal:   Provide an overview of management and organizational
                   behavior topics.
    
    Course Objectives:  After this course, students should be able to
    
         1.   discuss knowledgeably the functions and activities
    involved in management;
    
         2.   demonstrate an awareness of contemporary management and
              organizational issues;
    
         3.   demonstrate an understanding of management and
    organizational behavior terms commonly used in and about
    organizations.
    

* * *

Return to [ BUAD309 - Management and Organizational Behavior Home Page
](309main.html)  
Return to [ Dr. Diane L. Ferry Home Page ](ferryd.html)  
Return to [ University of Delaware Home Page ](http://www.udel.edu)  

* * *

##  BUAD309 - Management and Orgnaizational Behavior Schedule

###  Fall 1995 (95F) - Section 16

    
    
    
    Week  Date        Topic                    Assignment  
                                        * indicates written/e-mail
    
    1     AUG 31      Introduction
    
    2     SEP 5       Background               Robbins Chap. 1
                                             * Self-Assess with scoring
    
          SEP 7                                Case Application p. 22
    
    3     SEP 12      History                  Robbins Chap. 2
                                             * 1 Page Resume
                                               Case Application p. 59
                                             * e-mail assignment
    
          SEP 14      The Manager's Terrain    Robbins Chap. 3        
                                                 (Culture)
                                             * Self-Assess with scoring
                                             * Culture Reports
    
    4     SEP 19                               Robbins Chap. 3        
                                                 (Environment)
                                             * WWW pages complete
    
          SEP 21                               Robbins Chap. 4
                                             * Self-Assess with scoring
                                         Video Case Chap 8 (p. 238-239)
                                               Robbins Chap. 5
    
    5     SEP 26                               Robbins Chap. 6
                                             * Self-Assess with scoring
    
          SEP 28      ***  EXAM 1  *** 
    
    6     OCT 3       Planning                 Robbins Chap. 7
                                             * Self-Assess with scoring
                                             * A Day in Your Life
    
    ***   OCT 4   ***   Evening Session - REQUIRED   7:00 - 8:30 p.m.
                                          * 5 point PENALTY for missing
    
          OCT 5                                No Class
    
    7     OCT 10                               Robbins Chap. 8
                                             * Self-Assess with scoring
                                               Robbins Chap. 9
                                             * Self-Assess with scoring
    
          OCT 12                             * Japanese discuss/assign
    
    8     OCT 17      Organizing               Robbins Chap. 10
                                             * Self-Assess with scoring
     
          OCT 19                             * Japanese discuss/assign
    
    9     OCT 24                               Robbins Chap. 11
                                             * Self-Assess with scoring
    
          OCT 26                             * Japanese discuss/assign
    
    10    OCT 31                               Robbins Chap. 13
                                             * Self-Assess with scoring
    
          NOV 2                              * Japanese discuss/assign
    
    11    NOV 7       ***  EXAM 2  ***
    
          NOV 9                              * Japanese discuss/assign
    
    12    NOV 14      Leading                  Robbins Chap. 14
                                             * Self-Assess with scoring
                                               Robbins Chap. 15
            
    ***   NOV 15   ***   Evening Session - REQUIRED   8:00 - 9:30 p.m.
                                          * 5 point PENALTY for missing
    
          NOV 16                               No class
    
    13    NOV 21                               Robbins Chap. 16
                                             * Self-Assess with scoring
    
                    *** THANKSGIVING BREAK ***
                    
    14    NOV 28                               Robbins Chap. 17
                                             * Self-Assess with scoring
    
          NOV 30                               Robbins Chap. 18
    
    15    DEC 5       Controlling              Robbins Chap. 19
                                             * Self-Assess with scoring
    
          DEC 7       Conclusion               Robbins Chap. 20
    
    
    
          DEC 12 - 19     ***  FINAL EXAM WEEK  ***
    

* * *

Return to [ BUAD309 - Management and Organizational Behavior Home Page
](309main.html)  
Return to [ Dr. Diane L. Ferry Home Page ](ferryd.html)  
Return to [ University of Delaware Home Page ](http://www.udel.edu)  

* * *

##  BUAD309 - Management and Organizational Behavior Course Requirements

###  GRADING

    
    
              Class Assignments & Participation          20
              WWW Assignment & Japanese Projects         20
              Exam 1                                     20
              Exam 2                                     20
              Exam 3/Final Exam                          20
                       TOTAL                            100
    
    
         Assuming no unusual circumstances, letter grades relate to
    course points according to the table below.
    
              93.0-100  = A       77.0-79.9 = C+      60.0-62.9 = D-
              90.0-92.9 = A-      73.0-76.9 = C       59.9 & less = F
              87.0-89.9 = B+      70.0-72.9 = C-
              83.0-86.9 = B       67.0-69.9 = D+
              80.0-82.9 = B-      63.0-69.9 = D
    

###  GRADING EXPLANATIONS AND ASSIGNMENTS

**Class assignments and participation** are worth a total of twenty points
toward your course score. The breakout of points and assignments within this
category is:

Self-Assessments      These are questionnaires found at the end of each
chapter with the scoring at the end of the book (pages with an SK prefix).
What you are required to submit for theses assignments are: a) your answers
(appropriately numbered, answers only, not questions), b) your score, and c)
what the scoring means for you. You may e-mail these assignments or turn them
in on paper in class.  

_All assignments are due at the beginning of the class for which they are
assigned._  

Each completed self-assessment is worth 1/2 point. There are 14 such
assignments and a TOTAL point value of 6. That means that you could miss 2 of
these assignments before your course score would be affected.

1 Page Resume      The resume assignment must be submitted on paper. If you
already have a resume, great, this is an easy assignment for you. If you don't
have a resume, please use this assignment as the incentive for getting it
ready. If you need help, the Career Services Office is the first place to go.
The one page resume is worth 1 point.

E-mail Assignment      Please send one message (the same one) to me and two
others in this class. The topic of your message should be - The Most Exciting
Thing I Did This Summer. The e-mail assignment is worth 1 point.

A Day in Your Life      This assignment requires no outside reading or
research, just some deep thinking on your part. Describe in some detail a
typical work day in your life five (5) years from the due date for this
assignment. (See the schedule.) Include some of your thoughts as well as your
activities for this day. This reflection on your future should incorporate
your expectations, plans, and hopes for your life. Your written description
should be as long or as short as necessary to adequately cover your thoughts
and activities for this day. You may be creative with this assignment, but try
to take it seriously. You may submit this assignment on paper or via e-mail.
Please indicate somewhere in your paper the date and the day of the week you
are describing. The day in your life assignment is worth 1 point.

News Article Postings      Three times during the term you are asked to post
relevant news articles to the class newsgroup. As you read the business press,
watch for articles that are relevant to this course. In each posting, please
include: a) a complete citation for the article, b) a brief summary of the
article, and c) a brief explanation of how or why this article is relevant to
the course. There are 3 separate deadlines, October 3, November 7, and
December 7; you should submit 1 article sometime prior to each deadline. Each
news article posting is worth 1 point for a total of 3 points.  

Please note: The 1 page resume, the e-mail assignment, the day in your life
assignment, and the news article postings are each worth 1 point for a total
of 5 points. That means that you may miss one of these assignments without it
affecting your grade.

Culture Report      Groups of 3 - 4 people will be assigned to investigate the
organizational cultures of local organizations. The assignment is to interview
one or two people who work for some local company to find out more about the
culture of the organization for which they work. Please refer to Chapter 3 of
the Robbins text to find out what kinds of things are part of an
organization's culture. Groups and companies will be assigned in class.  

This assignment must be posted to the class newsgroup prior to class on
September 14. The length of your culture report should be roughly equivalent
to 1 typed page (double spaced, 12 point type).  

The culture report is worth 2 points. Each person in group will receive the
same grade.

Please note: _to get credit, assignments must be received at the beginning of
the class period or by the deadline indicated._

Class Participation      Class participation is important to the success of
this course in the classroom. Participation can take a variety of forms
including thought-provoking questions and/or briefly sharing experiences that
relate to the topics presented. There will be an emphasis on current topics
reported in popular business publications such as the _Wall Street Journal,
BusinessWeek_ , and _Fortune_. An important contribution can be made by
calling the class' attention to articles that you find in the popular business
press that are related to the topics we are discussing in class. These may
also be articles that you have posted to the newsgroup. Your comments can and
should facilitate everyone's learning.  

Please note that _attendance does not consitute participation._ However,
attendance is necessary for participation to occur. One reminder, disruptive
behaviors, such as arriving to class late and talking to a limited group of
classmates during lectures or class discussions, will adversely affect this
portion of one's grade.  

Class participation is worth 7 points and will be determined by the
instructor.

The **Japanese discussions and assignments** , including the World Wide Web
page assignment and the two evening class sessions, are related to the
exchange in which this class will be participating with students from
Tezukayama University in Nara, Japan. We will use the Internet to communicate
with the Japanese students, in real-time (the evening sessions) and via the
WEB and e-mail. The WEB page which you are assigned to create will be your
introduction to the Japanese students. Their pages, with pictures and
introductions, are available for you to view on the WEB. Each person in this
class will be assigned a student in Japan with whom to communicate directly.
There will be common reading and project assignments made to students in this
class and their respective correspondents in Japan. However, the students in
Japan are enrolled in three different classes, each with a different faculty
person, so the readings and projects will vary for students in this class. The
class days designated as "Japanese discuss/assign" are the days on which we
will discuss the correspondence with the Japanese.

With regard to the two evening class sessions designated on the syllabus. Your
_attendance is required._ If you celebrate Yom Kippur or have some conflict,
please see me no later than September 7, otherwise, missing one of these
sessions carries a _penalty_ of 5 points. The penalty is deliberately severe,
I want you to attend the real-time sessions.

The WEB page assignment is described in a separate handout. Your completed WEB
page, with picture, is worth 5 points. The other assignments which you are
asked to complete for this part of the course will be worth 15 points. Again,
the exact assignments will vary with the class in which your correspondent is
enrolled.

We will discuss the Japanese exchange portion of the course more in class.

Exams 1, 2, and 3 will consist of multiple choice questions, primarily from
the text. They may also include matching, true/false, and/or short answer
questions. You should know the terms, concepts, and theories discussed in the
text and the class AND understand them to the extent that you can apply them.
Exams 1 and 2 will include the material covered to that point in the term,
while Exam 3 will be comprehensive. Exam 3 will be given during the regularly
scheduled final exam period.

* * *

Return to [ BUAD309 - Management and Organizational Behavior Home Page
](309main.html)  
Return to [ Dr. Diane L. Ferry Home Page ](ferryd.html)  
Return to [ University of Delaware Home Page ](http://www.udel.edu)  

* * *

##  BUAD309 - Management and Organizational Behavior Course Policies

###  COURSE POLICIES

If you have a problem that affects your ability to attend class or complete
your assignments (you're sick, someone close to you is seriously ill), let the
instructor know before the class or no later than 24 hours after the class. It
is much easier to grant an extension on an assignment or to arrange an
alternate exam time, if necessary and warranted, before the due date has
passed than it is to try to rectify the situation fairly after the fact.
_Exams may not be made up (your grade will be zero) if the instructor has not
been notified within 24 hours of the scheduled exam time._

In the event that you cannot reach the instructor, please, leave a message via
e-mail, voice mail, or with one of the Business Administration Department
secretaries. Be polite to the secretaries; contrary to what you may think,
they are important people who can be very helpful when approached with
respect. If you created a problem for yourself, it is not anyone else's fault,
nor is it anyone else's responsibility to provide a solution.

Do not assume that because you inform the instructor beforehand that you are
going to miss a class that you have been "excused". As far as I am concerned,
there are no excuses; there are only consequences, some great and some small.
You either attend class or you do not. You establish the priorities. You
choose. You deal with the consequences. Consider it practice for the working
world you will be entering shortly.

**Academic honesty** is expected in this course. Be aware that plagiarism is a
serious violation that will not be tolerated. Any case of apparent academic
dishonesty will be referred to the Dean of Students without warning. You are
encouraged to become familiar with the University's Policy of Academic Honesty
and Dishonesty found in the _Student Handbook_. Copies of the _Handbook_ may
be obtained in the Student Information Center, located in the Student Center,
or in the office of the Dean of Students, Room 218, Hullihen Hall. The content
of the _Handbook_ applies to this course. If you are in doubt regarding the
requirements, please consult your instructor before you complete any
requirement of the course.

* * *

Return to [ BUAD309 - Management and Organizational Behavior Home Page
](309main.html)  
Return to [ Dr. Diane L. Ferry Home Page ](ferryd.html)  
Return to [ University of Delaware Home Page ](http://www.udel.edu)  

* * *

##  Basic Netiquette

  

E-mail has a certain etiquette, sometimes called "netiquette." Please pay
attention to the following rules.

Be positive.      I you disagree with someone, try to do so in a constructive
way. Make your messages relevant.  Be polite.      It's easy to have
misunderstandings between people of different cultures, so try to be polite
and friendly.  Use basic English.      Avoid comments which could offend or
confuse people.  Use humor with caution.      On e-mail because you cannot see
someone's face or hear their tone, it is difficult to know when they are
trying to be funny. Sometimes it can help to use a "smiley" face or symbol.
The most well-known ones are

    
    
         :-)   for a smile
         ;-)   for a wink
         :-(   for a frown
    

Choose your subject well.      Be clear and concise with the subject headings
you choose.  Use your own words.      Don't quote unless you need to and edit
out parts not needed when you do.  Be prompt with replies.      The real
advantage of e-mail is the speed with which messages can be sent back and
forth. So, check your mail regularly too.

* * *

Return to [ International Joint Seminar Home Page](309main.html)  
Return to [ BUAD428 - Management Systems ](428main.html)  
Return to [ Dr. Diane L. Ferry Home Page ](ferryd.html)  
Return to [ University of Delaware Home Page ](http://www.udel.edu)  

* * *

Last Updated September 13, 1996  
by [ Dr. Diane L. Ferry](ferryd.html)  
[ FerryD@college.be.udel.edu ](mailto:ferryd@college.be.udel.edu)

