![](cy_bar.gif)

### Soc 405 - Sociology of Sport

![](butterfly.gif)![](butterfly2.gif)

### Course goals

Sport is a physical activity that occurs in a given cultural milieu and is
socially structured. In this course, we examine:

  * sport using a sociological perspective. 
  * its form, its history, its impact on participants and society, and vice versa. 

### Course Requirements

Four examinations will be administered. Each counts 25% of your grade. The
examination format is true-false, multiple choice, and essay. Examination
questions systematically cover required readings (text, reader) and lectures.
Materials covered on each examination are mutually exclusive. You are
permitted to bring 1 page (8 1/2" x 11") of "crib notes" into the examination.

The Office of Disability Services requires that the following be added to the
course syllabus. "If you need course adaptations or accommodations because of
a documented disability or if you have emergency information to share. Please
contact the Office of Disability Services at Hoskins Library at 974-6087. This
(action) sic will ensure that you are properly registered for services."

My office is 907 McClung. Office hours are from 8:30 A.M. to 4:00 P.M.,
excluding scheduled class(9:05-9:55 am MWF) and advising hours(1-4 pm T) and
swim time (11:30 am to 12:30 pm). Home phone is 690-4167, please do not call
after 9:00 P.M. Office phone is 974-7019. Use voice mail or email  to leave
messages. I regularly check and return calls.  
  

**Required text** \--Jay J. Coakley. Sport in society: issues and
controversies. 7th edition). WCB. McGraw-Hill. Boston. 2001.

### Topical Outline

I. What is the subject-matter of sociology of sport?

  * A. Importance of sport, health, and leisure in American society 
  * B. Rise of sociology of sport as academic discipline 
  * C. Are these "universal forms" or "reproductions" of society? 

(Much of the literature attempts to define play, game, sport, and athletics
adhering to a paradigm of categorization wherein sets must be mutually
exclusive and unambiguous rather than defining sets as fuzzy categories.)

  1. Attempts to define play (Anthropological investigations on the nature of play are not discussed in this course, but the body of literature is large.) 
  2. Attempts to define games 
  3. Attempts to define sport 
  4. Attempts to define athletics 
  5. Sports as spectacle 
  6. Trash sports 
  7. Noncompetitive sports 

Coakley. Chapter 1 "The sociology of sport: What is it and why study it?" pp.
2-29.  
Coakley. Chapter 2 "Using social theories: What can they tell us about sports
in society?" pp. 30-54.

II. From Gambol to Game to Grunge

![](orange-b.gif)[ Greeks](http://web.utk.edu/~dhasting/grk.htm)  
![](orange-b.gif)[ Romans](http://web.utk.edu/~dhasting/rom.htm)  
![](orange-b.gif)[ Medieval](http://web.utk.edu/~dhasting/med.htm)  

  * History--Sport as a religious activity; as status-group activity; as a vehicle for controlling the working class; as a commercial enterprise. 

  1. Greeks, Romans, Medieval England, China, Japan, and Colonial America 

Coakley. Chapter 3 "A look at the past: How have sports changed throughout
history?" pp. 56-80.

  1. Rise of Modern Sport in United States--Status life styles, WASPs and ethnics, religion, technology, and commercialism  

![](orange-b.gif)[ Factors & Modern Sport Characteristics linked to
Globalization of Sport](http://web.utk.edu/~dhasting/global.htm)  

  * Culture and Sport (Optional section - expand for semester system) 
![](eye.gif)

**FIRST EXAMINATION** (Objective and short essays) -TBA

***

III. Issues of Selection and De-selection in Play, Games and Sport

  * Anticipatory socialization: American Values & Sports Creed (Harry Edwards) Reality or Myth 

Coakley. Chapter 4 "Sports and socialization." pp.81-108.

  * Selection into sport 

  1. Physical ability -- Aversive socialization versus positive feedback 
  2. Agents of socialization--parents, peers, coaches, school officials, preachers, and physicians 

  * The Work Routine 

![](orange-b.gif)(S) Donald W. Hastings, Suzanne B. Kurth, and Monika
Schloder. (1996) Work routines in the serious leisure career of Canadian and
U.S. Masters swimmers. Avante Vol. 2, No. 3: 73-92.

  * Socialization into sport 

  1. Gender socialization - Macho vs. feminina 
  2. Gender role transcendence 
  3. Gender stereotypes: Role strain versus cognitive balancing 

Coakley. Chapter 5 "Sports and children: Are organized programs worth the
effort?" pp.109-136.

  1. Motives for participation (Youth: Age-informal and formal games (fun, skills, or winning?) and Adults: Masters Sports) 

  * Reverse socialization 
  * Institutionalization 

IV. Sports Lifecourse--The Serious Leisure Career

  * Sports Participation--Age-linked concepts: age-graded activities, life cycle, and career -- see bibliography on career paper 

  1. Entry 
  2. Age-group 
  3. Elite (Amateur vs. Professional) 
  4. Exit--Attrition/Burnout; Retirement (Social death versus Rebirth); Withdrawal 
  5. Re-entry 
![](eye.gif)

**SECOND EXAMINATION** (Objective and short essays) TBA

  * Roles in Sport (Coaches and Others) 

Coakley. Chapter 8 "Coaches: How do they fit into sports experiences?" (5th
edition).

![](orange-b.gif)[ Suggested I lecture from this text **COLLEGE SWIMMING
COACH**](http://web.utk.edu/~dhasting/swim/coach/book.htm)  

V. Positive consequences of sports participation - Sports participation and
academic performance, aspiration, and collegiate success.

Coakley. Chapter 10 "Social class: Do money and power matter in sports?" pp.
279-310.

  * Athletes as Role Models 
  * Academic achievement 

Coakley. Chapter 14 "Sports in high school and college: Do varsity sports
programs contribute to education?" pp. 417-455.

VI. Mass Media and Gender

  * Fiction versus Reality 

Coakley. Chapter 12 "Sports and media: Could they survive without each other?
pp.350-384.

![](eye.gif)

**THIRD EXAMINATION** \-- TBA

  * Gender -- Myths, Opportunities won and lost 

Coakley. Chapter 8 "Gender and sports: Does equity require ideological
changes?" pp.202-241.

  * Race -- Lifestyles, stacking, economics 

Coakley. Chapter 9 "Race and ethnicity: Are they important in sports?" pp.
242-278.

VII. Commercialization of Sport

Coakley. Chapter 11 "Sports and economy: What are the characteristics of
commercial sports?" pp.311-349.

  * College Sports

  * Professional Sports 

VIII. Problems in Sport

  * Cheating -- Kemp versus University of Georgia 
  * Drugs: Performance enhancing and performance debilitating drugs, ergogenic aids. 

Coakley. Chapter 6 "Deviance in sport: Is it out of control?" pp. 137-172.

  * Gambling -- Tulane 
  * Violence 

Coakley. Chapter 7 "Violence in sports: How does it affect our lives?" pp.
173-201.

Coakley. Chapters 13, 15, & 16.(Optional)

![](eye.gif)

**FINAL EXAMINATION** \- As scheduled

**SUGGESTED WEBSITES**

![](orange-b.gif)[ Scholarly sport sites-University of Calgary THE SINGLE BEST
SITE ON SPORTS](http://www.ucalgary.ca/library/ssportsite)  
![](orange-b.gif)[ Best site for Swimming
Links](http://hcs.harvard.edu/~swim/links/)  
![](rb.gif) For selected sources of information (print  & electronic) on sport
business prepared by faculty at University of Memphis, see: [Sport Business
sources](http://www.hmse.memphis.edu/bureau.html)  

![](cy_bar.gif) Courses Taught

Undergraduate

![](orange-b.gif)[ Soc 311-Sociology of the
Family](http://web.utk.edu/~dhasting/family.htm)

![](orange-b.gif)[ Soc 331-Introduction to Research
Methods](http://web.utk.edu/~dhasting/soc331.htm)

![](orange-b.gif)[ Soc 405-Sociology of
Sport](http://web.utk.edu/~dhasting/soc405.htm)

![](orange-b.gif)[ Soc 462-Population
Problems](http://web.utk.edu/~dhasting/pop.htm)

|

Graduate

![](orange-b.gif)[ Soc 531-Methods of Sociological
Research](http://web.utk.edu/~dhasting/grad_meth.htm)

![](orange-b.gif)[ Soc 563-Demographic
Techniques](http://web.utk.edu/~dhasting/soc563.htm)

![](orange-b.gif)[ Soc 534-Adv. Sociological Analysis (formerly taught with
Suzanne Kurth)](http://web.utk.edu/~dhasting/soc534.htm)

![](orange-b.gif)[ Soc 665-Advanced Topics in Energy, Environment, and Natural
Resources: Inequalities in Environmental Risk (formerly taught with Sherry
Cable)](http://web.utk.edu/~dhasting/soc665.htm)

![](orange-b.gif)Seminar in Growth and Sustainability (with Sherry Cable)  
  
---|---  
  
Courses Taught in Physical Education

![](orange-b.gif)Advanced Competitive Swimming (Available on request - Snail
mail)(Coaching resume available on E-Mail request)  
  
![](home.gif)[ Academic Resume](http://web.utk.edu/~dhasting)  
  

![](celtic_b.jpg)  

