![](utepmainmandalla.gif) ![](uteptitle.gif)

**Professor E.Chavez **

**History 1301 - Sections 10237 and 14946**

**-** **Syllabus** **-** ****

**Fall Semester 1999**

**Course Schedule** | **Textbooks** | **Course Requirements**  
---|---|---  
**General Information** | **Final Exam** | **Grade Distribution**  
  
**

* * *

****General Information:**

**Professor's Office: Liberal Arts 314**

**Phone: 747.6591**

**E-mail:**[ echavez@utep.edu **](mailto:echavez@utep.edu)**

**My office hours: M-W-F 11:30a.m.-12:30 p.m.**

**Teaching Assistants: Covacha Quauhtlatoa , James Barrera , Dan M arquez .**

**The History T.A.'s office is located in Room 223 of the Liberal Arts
Building.**

**Each of my Teaching Assistant's office hours are different, and they
usually**

**post their office hours on the door of the History T.A. office.**

**The History T.A. office phone number is 915.747.7056.** ****

Back to the top of this page

* * *

**History 1301: The United States to 1865**

  
  

This is a general survey of U.S. history to1865.

My major objective in this course is to discuss the various forces that
created the American Republic. Consequently, we will explore the diverse
peoples-- American Indians, African Americans, Mexican Americans, and European
Americans-- who forged this nation. The course themes are the following: the
struggle for power among the various groups that inhabit the Americas, the
construction of community and identity, the limits of community, and
contradiction in U.S. history.

I have decided to designate most Fridays as a discussion day. On that day be
prepared to discuss the readings for the week. I have been known to call on
people. Be ready to dazzle your fellow students and me with your brilliance.

I must also remind you that plagiarism of any form, which is presenting
someone else's ideas as your own, will not be tolerated. If anybody is caught
committing this egregious offense they will fail the assignment and run the
risk of failing the class and being expelled from the university. I ask that
you respect your fellow students and me. If you are compelled to talk while in
class--DON'T. I find this habit annoying and just plain rude. I will not
tolerate class disturbances of any kind. This means cell phones, beepers, game
boys or other video games (yes, students have done this!!!) are prohibited. If
you do not comply with these rules I will ask you to leave the room. Finally,
I must remind you that this class starts when I walk in the lecture hall,
therefore you should be ready to pay attention and take notes when I start
talking. **I urge you to take notes--you won't be able to remember what was
said if you don't, and a good deal of the exams are based on class content.**

Return to top of this page ****

**

* * *

Course Requirements** **:**

There will be one take-home midterm and a take-home final. You will receive
the questions for both of these assignments a week before they are due. The
midterm questions will be distributed on **October 6** and will be due
**October 15** , while the final will be available on **December 1** and must
be turned in no later than **December 13**. For both exams you must integrate
material from the readings and the lectures. In addition, two papers based on
the assigned readings are required. The first paper will be due **September
13**. Paper number two will be an essay on some aspect of the novel _Beloved_.
It will be due **November 5**. All assignments must be either typed or done on
a word processor. Computers for your use are available at various campus
locations. **Late assignments will be penalized; each day a paper is tardy, 10
points will be deducted**.

Return to the top of this page

**Grade Distribution** **:** Exams: 25% each; _Beloved_ paper: 25%; 1 st
paper: 15%; Attendance and Participation: 10%.

* * *

******Required Texts** **:**

James Henretta, David Brody, Lynn Dumenil, **_America: A Concise History,
Volume 1: To 1877._**

Michael P. Johnson, **_Reading the American Past: Selected Historical
Documents, Volume1: To 1877_.**

Colin G. Calloway, **_The World Turned Upside Down: Indian Voices From Early
America._**

Edward Countryman, **_How Did American Slavery Begin?_** __

Toni Morrision, **_Beloved_** __.

Return to the top of this page.

* * *

Schedule

**Week 1: August 25& 27 **

Introduction; the Indian World

**_Readings_** __: Henretta et al., Chapter 1; Johnson,Chapter 1; Calloway,
Chapter 1.

  
  
  
  

**Week 2: August 30-September 3**

Europe

**_Readings_** __: Henretta et al., Chapter 2, Johnson, Chapter 2; Calloway,
Chapter 2.

  
  

**Week 3: September 8-10**.

The Clash of Cultures; the Middle Ground

**_Readings_** __: Henretta, et al., Chapter 3; Johnson, Chapter 3; Calloway
Chapter 3.

  
  

**Week 4: September 13-17**

**1 st Paper due.** Colonial Society; Origins of Slavery

**_Readings_** __: Henretta, et al., Chapter 4 & Johnson Chapter 4; Calloway,
Chapter 4. Countryman, Introduction, Chapters 3-5.

  
  

**Week 5: September 20-24**

The Great Awakening & the Seven Years War

**_Readings:_** __Henretta, et al., Chapter 5, Johnson, Chapter 5, Calloway,
Chapter 5. & Corresponding Documents.

  
  

**Week 6: September 27-October 1**

A People in Revolution

**_Readings_** __: Henretta, et al., Chapter 6; Johnson Chapter 6; Calloway,
Chapter 6.

  
  

**Week 7: October 4-8**

The Creation of the American Republic

**_Readings:_** __Henretta, et al. Chapter 7; Johnson, Chapter 7. Morrison,
pp. 4-73.

  
  

**Week 8: October 11 & 13 **

**Midterm due.** Jeffersonian Vision; Capitalism and a New Social Order

**_Readings_** _:_ Henretta, et al., Chapters 8  & 9; Johnson, Chapters 8 & 9;
Morrison, pp. 74-147.

  
  

**Week 9: October 18-22**

"Jacksonian Democracy v. the Rise of Capitalism.

**_Readings_** _:_ Henretta, et al., Chapter 10  & 11; Johnson Chapters 10 &
11; Morrison, pp. 148-209.

  
  

**Week 10: October 25 - 29**

American Freedom/American Slavery: Film: Toni Morrison on _Beloved_.

**_Readings_ :** Henretta, et al. Chapter 13; Johnson, Chapter 13; Morrison,
pp. 210-275.

  
  

**Week 11: November 1-5**

The Second Great Awakening ; American Reformers ; **_Beloved_ paper due.**

**_Readings_ :** Henretta, et al., Chapter 12; Johnson, Chapter 12.

  
  

**Week 12: November 8-12**

Race and Manifest Destiny, U.S.-Mexico War

**_Readings_ :** Henretta, et al., Chapter 14 ; Johnson, Chapter 14.

  
  

**Week 13: November 15 -19**

The Crisis of the 1850s

**_Readings_** __: Henretta, et al., Chapter 15; Johnson, Chapter 15.

  
  

**Week 14: November 22 & 24 **

Secession

  
  

**Week 15: November 29-December 3**

The Civil War

  
  

**Week 16: December 6**

Are we still fighting the Civil War?

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

**Your final is due no later than 5 p.m. on December 13** **.**

  
  

Click here top return to the top of this page

[Click here to return to the History 1301 course
page](http://www.utep.edu/echavez/courseone/1301home.html).

Click here to return to the Virtual Office of professor Chavez.

[Click here to return to the main home page](http://www.utep.edu/echavez).

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

