#  Readings in European History I

EUH 6935 AD 081 | Dr. Philip Kaplan  
---|---  
Time: Wednesday 1:30-4:15 | Office: Building 8, room 2533  
Room: 45/2807 | Office phone: 630-2886  
3 Credit hours | Office hours: M 11-12, T 3-4, R 11-12  
www.unf.edu/~pkaplan/readings.html | [pkaplan@unf.edu](mailto:pkaplan@unf.edu)  
  
> ###  The Course

>

>> > What is "Western Civilization," why do we teach it, and how do we do so?
By the end of this two-course sequence, class participants should be
substantially prepared to teach in undergraduate history programs. The course
echoes the structure of the undergraduate "Core" classes, but provides a much
deeper background in the subject areas covered and the ways historians have
dealt with them.

>

> ###  Format

>

>> > The class meets once a week; students are expected to come to class
having done the assigned reading, and prepared to discuss what they have read.
Class time will be devoted to discussing the major issues of the periods or
topics covered in the Core classes for that week. We will also devote time to
considering major pedagogical issues associated with teaching Western
Civilization, including syllabus construction, teaching strategies, fostering
discussion, and assessment.

>

> ###  Requirements and Evaluation

>

>> **Class participation (20%):** _All students_ will be required to do the
readings for each class as described below, and will be expected to report on
and discuss what they have read in class each week.

>

>> **Book reviews (20%):** _All students_ will be required to submit 2-page
reviews of 4 of the secondary texts they read for the class (one of the
reviews may be of a movie). These reviews will discuss the substance of the
argument, as well as the format and utility of the texts. Students may not
review the Western Civilization textbooks or primary readings.

>>

>> **Reading analysis (10%):** _All students_ must submit an essay of 5 pages
analyzing a primary text that would be used in a Western Civilization class.
The essay should consider a significant aspect of the work which would be
relevant to a discussion   of that work among undergraduates. The essay should
be submitted in the week to which that reading is relevant; copies of the
essay should be printed (or the file should be sent via Bb) to be handed out
to the other students in the class.

>>

>> **Syllabus preparation (30%):** _All students_ must submit, by the end of
the semester, a detailed syllabus with lesson notes for a stand-alone section
of Core I. The notes and plan should include discussion of readings and audio-
visual materials   to be used.

>>

>> **Classroom experience (20%):** _All students_ will be expected to sit in
on all of the lectures of Dr. Kaplan's or Dr. Halsall's Core I class. In
addition, at least once in the semester, students must attend at least one
class of a different instructor (including Dr. Reid or one of the adjunct
instructors, with their permission) and write a brief analysis of the format,
organization, and use of materials of that class.

>>

>> _Teaching students_ will be expected to report each week on their sections
of the previous week.  
> _Non-teaching students_ will be required to sit in on one class of each of
the teaching students, and write a brief analysis of the format, organization
and use of materials of that class. The report will be given to the teaching
student and discussed with her/him before it is submitted; the teaching
student will have the opportunity to add comments or a response.  
> _Non-teaching students  _ will also be expected to be part of a pool of
substitutes for friday sections; arrangements should be made with the teaching
students, based on their needs.

>

> ###  Readings

>

>> All students will be required to own a copy of a Western Civilization
textbook and to read the sections relevant to each week's Core class. Students
who are teaching sections may use either Noble et al., _Western Civilization:
The Continuing Experiment_ , if they are teaching for Dr. Kaplan, or Sherman
and Salisbury, _The West in the World_ , if they are teaching for Dr. Halsall.
If they are not teaching, they must use a different textbook (choose the most
recent edition; ask to borrow one from Dr. Kaplan's collection). Some of the
more popular texts are:

>>

>>>   * Marvin Perry et al., _Western Civilization: Ideas, Politics & Society_

>>>   * Mark A. Kishlansky et al. _Civilization in the West_

>>>   * Lynne Hunt, _The Making of the West. Peoples and Cultures. Voume I: to
1740_

>>>   * Jackson J. Spielvogel, _Western Civilization. Volume I to 1715_

>>>   * Donald Kagan et al., _The Western Heritage_.

>>>

>>

>> In addition, each student will be expected to read one substantial work for
each class, and be prepared to report on it: describe its outline, the topics
it covers, any substantial or controversial argument it makes, and how it
might be useful to presenting the material to undergraduates. A written
handout will be beneficial to the rest of the students. In addition, the
student should use it to inform her or his participation in discussion. The
work may be chosen from the works listed on the schedule; students who choose
to read a work not on the list should clear it with Dr. Kaplan in advance.

