![*](http://scriptorium.lib.duke.edu/graphics/quilt-square-a-75.gif)

# WOMEN and the CIVIL WAR

### _Manuscript sources in the Special Collections Library at Duke University_

* * *

_**[Civil War Women: Primary Sources on the
Internet](http://scriptorium.lib.duke.edu/women/cwdocs.html) provides links to
[manuscript collections at
Duke](http://scriptorium.lib.duke.edu/collections/civil-war-women.html) which
have been scanned and transcribed as well as links to other Civil War women's
archival documents which are available in cyberspace. **_

* * *

The following list describes original manuscript collections, held in Duke
University's Special Collections Library, which document women's experiences
during the Civil War. A few of the collections are available via the Internet
and have been hot-linked. Researchers are encouraged to consult the [Duke
Libraries on-line catalog](http://www.lib.duke.edu/online_catalog.html) for
more detailed information about the collections listed here or [contact our
Reference Desk](mailto:special-collections@duke.edu) for information on
ordering copies from any of the collections listed.

The Special Collections Library also houses numerous published sources such as
religious tracts, broadsides, magazines and newspapers that provide valuable
information about women's lives during the Civil War. Researchers should
[consult with the Women's Studies Reference Archivist](ref.html) or other
reference staff to find out more about identifying and locating these
materials.

### _African American/Slave Women during the Civil War Era_

Most of the collections listed below document women's experiences during the
Civil War from the perspectives of white women. Since few black women knew how
or had the opportunity to read or write before the Civil War, there is very
little documentation about their lives which exists in their own words.
Learning about black women's experiences during this time period is not
impossible, but requires using different types of documentation and research
methodologies. Plantation records, slave letters, and the diaries and letters
of white women can be used to explore various aspects of African American
women's lives during the Civil War period. For ideas of possible topics and
collections consult the bibliography [_**Retrieving African American Women's
History**_](http://scriptorium.lib.duke.edu/women/afrointr.html) or talk with
a reference archivist

**Ambler-Brown Family Papers, 1780-1865.** Charles Town, W. Va. and Fauquier
Co., Va.      Diary of Lucy Johnson Ambler, 1862-1863 (17 pp.) comments on
major Civil War battles, civilian morale and hardships, and depridations by
Union troops.

**William B. G. Andrews Papers, 1862-1870.** Pittsylvania Co, Va.
Personal letters from a Confederate soldier mention death of a female slave.

**Bedinger-Dandridge Family Papers, 1763-1957.** Shepherdstown, W. Va.
Large collection of family papers contains correspondence among the women
during the war.

**Harriette H. Branham Diary, 1861-1863.** Gordonsville, Va.      Diary of Va.
woman concerned with local events of Civil War such as troop activity,
civilian life, and economic conditions.

**Elizabeth J. Holmes Blanks Papers, 1832-1888.** Fayetteville, N.C.
Personal and business correspondence of family of planters and lawyers
includes considerable correspondence among the women of the family. Topics
include personal affairs, religious discussions, prophecy, stories of
hardships and anxieties related to the Civil War. (MICROFILM AVAILABLE)

**Amy Morris Bradley Papers, 1806-1921.** Wilmington, N.C.
Correspondence, diaries, and records document New Englander's duties as a
nurse at U.S. Sanitary Commission convalescent camps during the war and her
efforts to establish free schools for blacks and whites in Wilmington, N.C.
directly following the war. (MICROFILM AVAILABLE)

**Huldah Annie Fain Briant Papers, 1846-1888.** Santa Luca, Ga.      War
correspondence of Briant is chiefly from her husband-to-be but includes
account of the impressment of a local Jew's merchandise for the army by women.

**Rhoda S. Briggs Letters, 1852-1874.** Elsworth, N.Y.      Letters to Briggs
from friends and relatives, mostly women, in Bloomington, Ill., Rochester,
N.Y., and elsewhere discussing social and family matters and containing
Northern reactions to the Civil War.

**Mary M. Carr Diary, 1860-1865.** Bastrop, La.      Chronicles the day-to-day
life on a cotton plantation and the relationship of the Carrs with friends and
neighbors. (MICROFILM AVAILABLE)

**Mary Jane Cook Chadick Diary, 1862-1865.** Huntsville, Al.      Describes
Federal raids on and occupation of Huntsville and comments on local people and
trouble with slaves occasioned by the presence of Federal troops.

**Clement Claiborne Clay Papers, 1811-1925.** Huntsville, Al.      Papers of a
lawyer, senator, Confederate diplomat, and planter from Huntsville Al.,
includes Civil War correspondence among the women in the family and the
diaries and scrapbooks, 1859-1905, of his wife, Virginia Tunstall Clay.

**Confederate Veteran Papers, 1786-1933.** Nashville, Tn.      Correspondence,
unpublished articles, and other materials written for a periodical published
between 1893 and 1932, includes information on the prison experience of women
in Kansas City; Sally Tompkins, Capt. C.S.A; ballad of Emma Samson; Belle Boyd
after the war; and a book review of Women of the South in War Time.

**Corpening Family Papers, 1780-1922.** Burke and Caldwell Cos., N.C.
Letters from Ann Corpening Ramsaur who lived in Cherokee Co., N.C. during the
war describes raids by deserters and Union men and subsequent plans for the
family to move away from the area.

**Cronley Family Papers, 1806-1944.** Wilmington, N.C.      Fragments of
diaries kept by Jane Cronley and her mother, who are vocal abolitionists,
during the war, along with two memoirs of family experiences during the Civil
War.

**Ann Pamela Cunningham Papers, 1857-1874.** Laurens, S.C.      Letters
relating to the collection of money for the Mount Vernon Ladies Association of
the Union.

**Lois Wright Richardson Davis Papers, 1851-1881.** Lowell, Mass.
Correspondence between women of large family from Lowell, Mass., reflect
dynamics of family divided by the Civil War. Letters home from daughters
Eunice and Ellen, who moved to Mobile, Ala. in the 1850s and whose husbands
joined the Confederate militia, record the reactions of newly transplanted
Northerners to the South before and during the outbreak of the Civil War.
Later letters from Eunice, whose second husband is a black sea captain,
describe their life in the Grand Caymen Islands.

**Francis Warrington Dawson Papers, 1559-1963.** Charleston, S.C.      Papers
of a literary family from Charleston, S.C. include the diaries, 1862-1866, and
scrapbooks, 1853-1882, of Sarah Morgan Dawson. (Note: Dawson's diaries were
largely edited and published in 1913 as A Confederate Girl's Diary.)
(MICROFILM AVAILABLE)

**Lucy Muse Walton Fletcher Papers, 1816-1968.** Broadway, Va.      Family
letters, clippings, poetry and diaries, 1829-1870, which reflect Civil War
hardships, care of the sick and wounded, Negro soldiers and freedmen, and
economic difficulties after the war.

**Eliza Fludd Papers, 1865-1868.** Charleston, S.C.      Letters from Fludd to
her friend, Mrs. Jolliffe, describe Fludds experiences and trials during and
at the end of the war, including watching the surrender of Fort Sumter from
"the lofty house of a relative," living in Camden, S.C. when Sherman's army
passed through, torture and slander of various relatives, and the family's
destitute state at the end of the war. Fludd sympathizes with the "respectable
old families of the country" and blames her privation and that of others to
the Freedman's Bureau.

**Kate D. Foster Diary, 1863-1872.** Adams Co., Miss.      Daughter of
plantation owner, entries concern Civil War and Foster's opinion about the
righteousness of the Southern cause and the effect of the war on her home and
local blacks.

**George Gage Papers, 1864-1903.** Beaufort, S.C.      Gage's wife, Sarah Ely,
kept a journal, 1864-1866, that include the minutes of the Freedmen's Home
Relief Association in 1864 as well as descriptions of her experiences teaching
in schools for the ex-slaves after the war.

**John Mead Gould Papers, 1841-1943.** Portland, Me.      Diaries, 1860-1865,
of Amelia Twitchell who left Maine with her sister, Adelthia, to teach
freedmen in Beaufort, S.C. around 1864. Letters from Adelthia to Gould
describe their teaching experiences. Amelia eventually marries Gould in 1865.
Includes 1856-1880 diary and scrapbook of Susan McDowell. (MICROFILM
AVAILABLE)

**[Rose O'Neal Greenhow Papers,
1860-1864.](http://scriptorium.lib.duke.edu/greenhow/)** Richmond, Va.
Civil War letters from Greenhow, an agent and spy in the Confederate Service,
to Alexander Robinson Boteler and Jefferson Davis reporting the progress of
her work.

**Greenville Ladies' Association Minutes, 1861-1865.** Greenville, S.C.
Portions of minutes of an organization to aid Confederate soldiers.

**Margaret Gwyn Diary and Account book, 1854-1867.** Irving College, Tenn.
Gwyn's diary, chiefly 1862-1864, describes how the Civil War disrupted life on
a large farm, documents the relationships among the women in this small
community, and makes numerous references to Confederate and Union troops who
visited the farm.

**Constant C. Hanks Papers, 1861-1865.** Hunter, N.Y.      Letters of Union
soldier include note of an inspection tour by Dorthea Dix in 1863 and comments
on the work of the U.S. Sanitary Commission.

**Hinsdale Family Papers, 1712-1973.** Raleigh, N.C.      Contains the papers
of Ellen Devereux Hinsdale and several other Hinsdale women which document
activities in various women's clubs. Includes record books from the Ladies
Hospital Aid Association of Rex Hospital in Raleigh which contains information
on fundraising drives, social events, and sewing bees.

**Inverson Louis Harrison Papers, 1827-1878.** Milledgeville, Ga.      Legal
correspondence of judges include information on war relief work by local
women.

**Theophilus Hunter Holmes Papers, 1861-1867.** Sampson County, NC.
Military correspondence and papers of Confederate general includes petitions
from women asking for protection of lives and property.

**Richard E. Jacques Papers, 1863-1865.** Charleston, SC.      Personal
correspondence between CSA private and his fiancee includes discussion of the
lack of necessities and luxuries among Confederate women.

**Gertrude Jenkins Papers, 1859-1908.** Winston-Salem, N.C.      Narrative of
Margaret Elizabeth Clewell describes journey of young women from the Salem
Female Academy to Fauquier Co, Va., to nurse the sick of the 21st North
Carolina Infantry, the hospital and care of the sick at Thoroughfair Gap and
Manassas.

**Henry Kagey Papers, 1769-1883.** Shenandoah Co., Va.      Includes minutes,
1864, of the Association for the Relief of Maimed Soldiers in New Market.

**Ladies Volunteer Aid Society of the Pine Hills Minutes, 1861.** Chapel Hill,
La.      Minutes recording the organization and meetings to support companies
of soldiers from the area. (MICROFILM AVAILABLE)

**James Longstreet Papers, 1848-1904.** Gainesville, Ga.      Letters relating
mainly to Reconstruction include an 1888 letter providing information on
Loretta Janeta Velaques who served in the Confederate Army under the disguise
of LT. Harry Buford. (MICROFILM AVAILABLE)

**Lucas-Ashley Family Papers, 1830-1909.** Va. and Fla.      Includes letters
of mother to daughter during Civil War which discuss family news, illnesses,
news and opinions about the war, accounts of wounded Confederate soldiers in
town, funeral, mail problems, and civilian hardships in Charlottesville, Va.

**Clara Victoria Dargan MacLean Papers, 1849-1920.** Columbia, S.C.
Personal diaries, poetry, scrapbooks, and correspondence of teacher and writer
contains much information on Southern literature and the effects of the Civil
War on literary efforts and remuneration.

**Frank Moore Papers, 1865-1866.** New York, N.Y.      Author of Women of the
War (1866), an account of northern women's service during the Civil War.
Collection consists chiefly of letters from and about the women featured in
the book who served as nurses or in a related capacity.

**Jacob Mordecai Papers, 1784-1936.** Warrenton, N.C.      The papers of a
family of prominent educators in the South includes considerable
correspondence among the women in the family as well as the journals of Isabel
Mordecai, 1858-1861, in Charleston, S.C.; a secretary's report, 1861, of the
Sick Soldiers Relief Society, in Raleigh, N.C.; and correspondence with Sally
Vaughn Norral, a former slave.

**Munford-Ellis Family Papers, 1777-1942.** Richmond and Lynchburg, Va.
Personal and family letters of the daughters of George Wythe Munford contain
information of the details of household economy and general conditions during
the Civil War. A scrapbook, 1861-1871, of Lizzie Ellis Munford contains
Confederate verse and momentos. Letters of Margaret Nimmo Ellis span from 1840
to 1877 and contain accounts of war activities and social changes resulting
from the Civil War.

**Mary Norton Papers, 1852-1895.** Highstown, N.J.      Letters to Norton from
Clara Barton documenting their friendship, attempts to administer relief
services to wounded soldiers during the Civil War, and Barton's post-war
speaking engagements on behalf of the American Red Cross.

**Presley Carter Person Papers, 1767-1915.** Louisburg, N.C.      Letter
before and during the Civil War from Harriet Person Perry to her husband, as
well as her 1869 diary, give and excellent picture of home life on the Texas
frontier. Also includes a daybook kept by Thomas Person's wife during the war.

**Hugh N. Ponton Papers, 1859-1864.** Nelson Co., Va.      Correspondence
during Civil War reflects difficulties of a young wife left to manage farm and
family.

**Mrs. Charles C. Rainwater Papers, 1861-1865.** St. Louis, Mo.
Reminiscences concerning friction between Union and Confederate sympathizers
in Mo., and Rainwater's journey to meet her wounded husband who was a
Confederate officer.

**George Junkin Ramsey Papers, 1802-1918.** Lynchburg, Va.      Letters,
1855-1871, from Sabra S. Tracy, a Vermont schoolteacher who married Ramsey, a
Virginia minister, document their courtship, marriage, and life of a
Northerner in the South during the Civil War.

**William Young Ripley Papers, 1843-1933.** Rutland Co., Vt.      Letters of a
banker's wife to her sons stationed in the Vermont Infantry concern personal
matters and document Mrs. Ripley's efforts to raise supplies for the U.S.
Sanitary Commission and her activities in Centre Rutland, Vt. to support the
war efforts. Contrast with letters home from Ripley's daughter while she was
living in London, 1864-1873.

**Daniel Ruggles Papers, 1845-1879.** Fredricksburg, Va.      Includes letters
from Confederate women offering supplies.

**William C. Russel Papers, 1856-1865.** New York, N.Y.      Russel moved his
family from Massachusetts to Tennessee in 1864 to run a liberated plantation
with ex-slaves. Letters from his daughter Lucy to her Aunt Ellen describe her
experiences teaching blacks there.

**Mary French Scott Papers, 1857-1904.** Granville and Onslow Cos., N.C.
Correspondence, 1860-1865, relates to life and events during the Civil War and
includes some legal and financial papers, passes, clippings, and miscellaneous
items.

**Whitefoord Smith Papers, 1807-1893.** Charleston, S.C.      Civil War
materials relating to gifts of the Spartanburg ladies to the soldiers.

**M. J. Solomons Scrapbook, 1861-1863.** Savannah, Ga.      Presumably kept by
a woman, scrapbook is comprised of newspaper clippings documenting the first
years of war and includes large selection of poems and various articles about
women's role in the Confederacy, such as General Butler's controversial
proclamation on (against) women in New Orleans and Confederate spy Rose O'Neal
Greenhow.

**Emma Dorothea Eliza Newton Southworth Papers, 1849-1901.** Georgetown, D.C.
Literary correspondence with Robert Bonner, editor of the New York Ledger,
concerning the publication of E.D.E.N. Southworth's stories discusses
Southworth's hatred of Confederates. (MICROFILM AVAILABLE)

**Laura W. Stebbins Papers, 1852-1884.** Springfield, Mass.      Personal
correspondence of Stebbins who taught in Mississippi before and after the
Civil War, and who also operated her own school in Springfield. Contains
information on subjects taught, remuneration of teachers, merits of Northern
and Southern teachers in Southern schools.

**Nellie F. Stearns Papers, 1865.** New Bern, N.C.      Letter from a Northern
teacher in a Negro school describing the African Church in which she is
teaching and the close observation of their activities by Southerners.

**Ella Gertrude Clanton Thomas Diaries, 1848-1889.** Augusta, Ga.      Lengthy
and reflective diaries of Georgia plantation mistress detail relations between
white men and Negro women, Civil War military activity, Union occupation of
the South, the state of the Southern society after the war, labor and servant
problems, financial losses and poverty. (Note: The diaries have been published
as The Secret Eye, however, they have been edited and many entries in the
manuscripts are not included in the published version.) (MICROFILM AVAILABLE)

**Sarah E. Thompson Papers, 1855-1904.** Greene Co., Tenn.      Correspondence
contains testimonials of Thompson's services to the Federal government
documenting her duty in hospitals where she nursed wounded soldiers, her
spying activities during the Civil War, and her lectures after the war.

**Tillinghast Family Papers, 1765-1971.** Fayetteville, N.C.      Various
Civil War experiences of the Tillinghast women. Journal, 1861, of Emily
Tillinghast describes homelife during the early months of the Confederacy.
Long letter (56 pp.) of Sarah Ann Tillinghast describes making clothes for the
local infantry and activities of the Union soldiers. An account by Robina
Tillinghast gives her reaction to Sherman's march through Fayetteville.

**George W. West Papers, 1785-1910.** Polk Co., Ga.      Letters of Josephine
West and her friends concern social life just before the Civil War and the
difficulties of managing slaves during the Civil War.

**[Alice Williamson Diary,
1864.](http://scriptorium.lib.duke.edu/williamson/)** Gallatin, Tenn.
Diary of an opinionated 16 year old rebel farm girl near Gallatin, Tenn.,
describes the Yankee occupation of surrounding areas, projects to educate
former slaves, her own school life and social visits.

**Elvira Withrow Papers, 1864.** Banks Co., Ga.      Letters concerning the
evacuation of women from Cass Station, Ga., to Atlanta, to Athens, and finally
Banks Co.

**Isabella Anna Roberts Woodruff Papers, 1768-1865.** Charleston, S.C.
Correspondence between Woodruff and several other single self-supporting
middle class women documenting the variety of teaching positions held by the
women at schools and academies and with private families as well as the
struggles of teaching during the Civil War. Also included are Civil War
courtship letters which begin in 1865 and detail Sherman's march through S.C.

**Yonce Family Papers, 1827-1893.** Wytheville, Va.      Letters written by
the Yonce sisters show the reactions of Southern women to the war,
particularly Sophia, who writes from Gladsboro, N.C., about how her whole life
is affected by this 'wicked war' and how hard it is to keep up the farm
without her husband.

* * *

**[Women's Studies Bibliographies](bib.html) | [Duke Special Collections
Library ](http://scriptorium.lib.duke.edu) | [Duke Libraries
](http://www.lib.duke.edu)**

* * *

![*](http://scriptorium.lib.duke.edu/graphics/quilt-square-a-75.gif) Ginny
Daley  
Last Revised 6/96  

