[![](../../../Shared/mellon3logo.png)](../../../index.html) |  
---|---  
  
# Notes from:  
[NERCOMP Instructional Management Systems
Workshop](http://www.nercomp.org/nercomp/is/ims.html)  
  
### Index to notes  
  
## Program

  * Introduction and Overview
  * IMS - Setting the Course for Distributed Learning
  * Vendor and School Alliances
    * Choosing the Right Tool for the Job: WebCT offers a rich set of Web-based course management tools for UMass faculty
    * CourseInfo at the Yale School of Medicine - Different (Key)Strokes for Different Folks
    * Teaching to Extend the Classroom with Lotus LearningSpace
  * Home-grown solutions
    * Yale
    * Harvard
  * Assessment

##  Additional information

  * Tri-College Questions
    * How are faculty using these products in the classroom?
    * What features do faculty find are important? What do they find limiting?
    * Copyright issues, especially for graphics.  Any policies to protect faculty and the colleges?  What constitutes fair use?
    * Can instructional management systems handle font encodings other than latin scripts (Double Byte languages like Korean and Chinese and Japanese), font encodings like KOI8 for Russian, Right to left languages like Hebrew?
    * Where does the course material reside?  Do we host the site (and therefore have some control and ability to modify the program) or do they host the site and we send all material to them?
    * What was the selection processes and criteria used in looking at the products?
    * What were people hoping to get out of CourseInfo and what did they get?
    * Have any tried hooking in the systems with their administrative database systems?  Have any tied their IMS into their main campus authentication systems. (That is, are they managing a whole new account base, or using existing accounts and passwords?)
    * How have the faculty taken to the systems?
    * How have students taken to the systems?
  * Greetings from former members of the Tri-college community

  
  
### Program  
  
#### Introduction and Overview  
Michael Roy, Director of Academic Computing Services, Wesleyan University

Michael Roy recently established an [Instructional Services Special Interest
Group](http://www.nercomp.org/nercomp/is) (IS SIG) as part of the [North East
Regional Computing Program](http://www.nercomp.org) (NERCOMP).  IS SIG will
address issues related to the use of technology in instruction, including:

  * electronic classrooms
  * instructional management systems
  * discipline-specific support
  * media
  * "content" development

A _moderated_ mailing list for IS SIG has been established to distribute
information on instructional services, such as:

  * announcements (talks, jobs, new sites, etc.)
  * conference reports
  * reviews (books, articles, web sites, software, and hardware)
  * surveys (short 3-4 question surveys on specific topics)

To add your name to the IS SIG mailing list you can either [sign-up on the
web](http://lyris.wesleyan.edu:8080/cgi-bin/lyris.pl?enter=nercomp-
is&text_mode=0) or send email to
**[lyris@lyris.wesleyan.edu](mailto:lyris@lyris.wesleyan.edu)** with the body
of the message saying **subscribe nercomp-is**.   [Author's note: As of
October 11, 1999, there has been very little traffic on this list.]

* * *

####  IMS - setting the course for distributed learning  
Mark Resmer, Executive Director, IMS; Associate VP for Information Technology,
Sonoma State University

Mark described the university of the future as a distributed learning
organization in which:

  * Faculty can **refocus class time on quality interaction with the students** and **use technology to handle the factual part of learning and skills development**.
  * The **development of classes will be separated from course delivery**.   The Open University (OU) currently uses this model.  Their courses are developed by faculty development teams at a cost of approximately $1-2 million per course and are taught by separate teaching teams.
  * **Residential universities and colleges** will continue to **provide socialization skills to 18 year olds**.
  * Universities will also need to **provide certification of competencies for mature students** in an efficient manner.

[IMS](http://www.imsproject.org/) was founded as part of an
[EDUCAUSE](http://www.educause.edu) (formerly Educom) initiative to spur
innovation in the distributed learning marketplace.  It is a coalition of [35
investors](http://www.imsproject.org/im_members.html) (companies) and [200
developers](http://www.imsproject.org/joindn.html) (colleges and universities)
who are working to develop standards to enable the development of a
nonproprietary, Internet-based infrastructure for distributed learning.  To
accomplish this goal, IMS:

  * collects requirements from all sectors
  * develops specifications for the interoperatability of all systems and content
  * facilitates the development of prototypes
  * actively promotes the adoption of specifications as international standards
  * provides development support

IMS recently completed the [IMS Meta-data
specification](http://www.imsproject.org/work_public/meta-data_did188.html)
for describing learning resources.  This information can be used to help
people locate appropriate learning materials on the Web.  The top level of the
IMS meta-data tags is:  
  | General | Basic library catalog information, such as author and title  
---|---  
Life Cycle | In development, beta testing, etc.  
Meta-Meta Data | Information about the meta-data, such as who created it  
Technical | What operating system it runs under, memory and system
requirements, etc.  
Educational Use | Learning objectives, pedagogy, etc.  
Rights Management | Who owns the material, how you can use it, etc.  
Relation | Linkages to related material  
Annotation | Users' comments on the material; similar to peoples' comments on
books at amazon.com  
Classification | Mappings to other cataloging systems, such as the Library of
Congress  
  
IMS is also looking at developing specifications for:

  * assessment (question) interoperability
  * inter-campus security
  * e-commerce
  * repository services
  * collaborations
  * groups
  * conformance testing to enable developers to determine how well their systems meet the specifications
  * portable student profiles

  

* * *

####  Vendor and School Alliances

_Presentations by three schools using one of the following commercial
products: WebCT, CourseInfo, and Lotus LearningSpace._  


####  Choosing the Right Tool for the Job: WebCT offers a rich set of Web-
based course management tools for UMass faculty  
[Doris Peterson](mailto:peterson@oit.umass.edu), Manager of Computing
Instruction and Faculty Support, University of Massachusetts at Amherst

UMass supports WebCT as one of several instructional management systems.  They
have a support staff of 8 full time employees and 10 graduate and
undergraduate students who work with faculty on a one-on-one basis.

Adoption of WebCT has been slow because many UMass students still do not have
access to computers and/or the Internet.  Since late Spring 1997, only a dozen
WebCT courses, ranging in size from 8 to over 300 students, have been
developed.   They have found that developing WebCT courses and modules takes
at least as much time and effort as developing traditional courses and
materials.

UMass faculty who have integrated WebCT into their courses have had positive
student experiences.  One example involved a faculty member in the University
Without Walls who feels that WebCT has enabled her class to create a "place"
where she can meet with the students regardless of their separation in place
and time.  She uses WebCT bulletin boards, e-mail, and chat rooms  to
encourage communications among students and the faculty between their monthly
face-to-face meetings.  Although the students had access to similar tools
prior to  the availability of WebCT, they didn't use them as much because the
tools were difficult to access and use.  WebCT addresses these problem by
integrate all of these tools into a single, simple-to-use environment
accessible via the Web.  In addition, it made new forms of interaction
possible, such as allowing students to share their work with each other,
performing online midterm evaluations, taking quick course polls, and threaded
class discussions.

UMass faculty have found that students actively participate in online course
activities at a higher rate when participation in the activity is factored
into their grade.  They have also found that discussion groups are most
effective when faculty actively participate and model the types of behavior
and communication they want from their students.

To learn more about WebCT:

  * [sample UMass WebCT-based courses](http://webct.oit.umass.edu:8900/) ( **log on** as **guest** using the **password guest** ),
  * [create your own test course](http://www.ult.net/try/how_get.html) on WebCT's servers using their free four month trial offer, and
  * [UMass' online WebCT support site](http://www.umass.edu/webct/) for faculty and students

  

* * *

####  CourseInfo at the Yale School of Medicine - Different (Key)Strokes for
Different Folks  
[Judy M. Spak](mailto:judy.spak@yale.edu), Reference Librarian and
Instructional Technology Coordinator, Cushing/Whitney Medical Library, Yale
University

Student demand for easy access to course materials from off campus led to the
introduction of instructional management systems at Yale Medical School.  The
students initially approached the faculty and asked them to make their course
materials available online, but when the faculty did not respond, they
escalated their request to the administration.

Yale Medical School started using CourseInfo in Fall of 1997.  Their big
success story is on online community they created for the students in an off-
campus primary care clerkship in which the students work off-campus, often in
remote locations with poor library access.  They use Course Info to let
everyone know who is in the course, to provide information on how to use the
site.  In addition, because many students are in locations with limited access
to libraries, the course provides an electronic syllabus with access to full-
text articles using OVID and JumpStart.  CourseInfo allows the instructor to
provide the students with the same level and quality of instruction regardless
of their work location and it allows everyone to have equal access to the
required reading.

Faculty at **Yale Medical School** have been slow to adopt CourseInfo because
of the time investment required to put courses online.   Even the faculty  who
put material online often stop adding new material starting around mid-
semester because of time pressures.  Another significant limitation is that
the medical school has no dedicated support staff to work with faculty who
want to put their courses online.  The only support comes from the library,
which offers scanning services and limited one-on-one training and
troubleshooting.

Overall, the students are happy with the system.  However, their two biggest
complaints are that they would like to see more course offer materials online
(currently only about 22% of the courses use CourseInfo) and they would like
the courses that provide online materials to do so consistently throughout the
semester.

Please contact [Judy Spak](mailto:judy.spak@yale.edu), if you are interested
in looking at any of the [Yale Medical School courses that use
CourseInfo](http://info.med.yale.edu:8080/).  


* * *

####  Teaching to Extend the Classroom with Lotus LearningSpace  
Phillip D. Long, Executive Director, TLT Center and the Institute for
Technology Development, Seton Hall University  
[Stephen Landry](landryst@shu.edu), Chief information Officer, Seton Hall
University

Several years ago, a survey of faculty at Seton Hall indicated that the number
two problem on campus was the lack of access to or problems with technology.
To address this problem, the university developed a new strategic plan for a
ubiquitous computing environment in which all students and faculty receive a
university-owned laptop.  They allocated $15 million over 5 years to this
project.  IBM was selected as the sole vendor because they could provide
everything (laptops, the network, and software) for $15 million.   All of
their computers and the network equipment are leased from IBM.  Because the
average expected life cycle of leased equipment in 2-4 years, this approach
allows them to update their network equipment more frequently without having
to approach the university administration for additional funding.

Seton Hall uses Lotus LearningSpace because that is IBM's instructional
management system.  They encountered a large number of problems when they ran
a pilot project using Lotus LearningSpace in Spring 1997.  When they went into
production in Summer 1998, the demand was greater than anticipated and
approximately 200 classes serving 2000 students were put online.  The day
before classes started nothing was working, so IBM parachuted in machines and
technical support staff to get them up and running.

Seton Hall offers good support for faculty putting courses online, and they
have approximately 60 student workers and two full-time staff who spend 90% of
their time working on faculty projects.  The features of Lotus LearningSpace
that they have found most useful include:

  * the ability to **replicate** (create a copy) of **course materials on any computer**.   This feature is especially important in Seton Hall's mobile computing environment in which everyone has a computer that they can use anywhere whether it is connected to the network or not.  The speakers also noted that this feature distinguishes Lotus LearningSpace from all other instructional management systems.
  * an **online media center** , where multimedia resources can be stored.
  * courserooms where **class discussions** can take place.   Separate discussion groups can be created to allow students to work individually or in groups.  Faculty members have access to all of the discussions, and they can view each student's contributions to all discussion groups, which may be useful for determining his/her participation in online activities.
  * **profiles** , which contain a grade book as well as student information and biographies.
  * powerful **assessment** features for creating tests that include various types of questions, including multiple choice, open-ended, and matching.  In addition, faculty can specify when tests are available, set time limits for completion, and control the number of times each student may take the test (once or multiple times).
  * the ability to **restart a course** (or copy and restart a course), which causes the system to go through all of the class material and remove all student conversations and annotations.
  * the **learning curve** for Lotus LearningSpace **is modest** , and it does not require a knowledge of HTML.

The speakers noted that Lotus LearningSpace is an effective pedagogical tool
for distributed learning, dialogic learning, and reflective and critical
thinking, but that it is not useful for authentic and complex learning, and
public accountability, and it dictates a linear pedagogical style.

Lotus LearningSpace is primarily targeted at the corporate workplace so there
are times when there is a mismatch with the university's needs.  Most of he
problems seem to be caused by Lotus Notes, which is the backend database for
Lotus LearningSpace.  Lotus Notes is non-trivial to administer, and it
requires at least one full-time support person.  In addition, Lotus Notes is
an enterprise-wide solution so the entire organization must adopt it for
institutional workflow, e-mail, and bulletin boards.

Please take a look at [Seton Hall's Lotus
LearningSpace](http://www.cat.shu.edu/learningspace/) to see how they are
using this product.  


* * *

##  Home-grown solutions

####  Yale  
Ed Kairiss, Director of Instructional Computing, Yale University  
Peter Snow, Instructional Technology Group, Yale University  
Gloria Hardman, Instructional Comp Support Specialist, Yale University

About 1.5 years ago **Yale's Faculty of Arts and Sciences** was trying to
decide whether to purchase a commercial instructional management systems or
build their own.   The factors that they considered were:

  * longevity - will the company still be around in several years?
  * customization - how well does the system accommodate unanticipated needs?
  * cost - purchase price, development, and support
  * scalability
  * security - Yale is very security conscious.  They want each person to have a single login and password that is Kerberos compliant.
  * ease of use

Security and ease of use where the two main factors that lead to their
decision to develop their own system.

Prior to the development of the new system, Yale offered faculty a variety of
services (Web pages, electronic handouts and drop boxes, news groups, and
electronic syllabi), but these services were all on different machines and had
different interfaces, so faculty tended not to use them.  The new system
provides all of the above features via a single Web interface that is easy to
use.  By October 1999, they will also have support for creating forms and
quizzes, and, in the longer term, they plan to add support for a multimedia
data store, and collaborative workgroups.  Their code is written as Java
servlets, and Peter Snow is the primary systems developer.

Yale has two full-time instructional designers for the 750 faculty in the
Faculty of Arts and Science.  They offer their faculty three forms of
training.  First, they offer workshops in a computer classroom, but most
faculty do not attend.  Most often they offer this type of training to a group
of teaching assistants from a particular department.  Second, they work one-
to-one with faculty members.  They have found this approach to be the most
successful because they can't get faculty to come to the classes.  Third, they
have documentation for their system, but they said that it needs to be
improved.

My notes on their usage statistics are a bit confusing.  At the start of the
presentation,  Ed Kairiss said that in Fall 1998 110 courses in the Faculty of
Arts and Sciences (includes all undergraduates) had Web sites and another 400
had an electronic presence (i.e., course mailing lists, newsgroups, or
electronic drop boxes).  Later, Peter Snow said that 52 classes used their
system in Fall 1998 and 81 classes in Spring 1999.

If you have questions about this system, please contact the speakers via
[e-mail](mailto:classes@yale.edu).  


* * *

####  Harvard  
Paul Bergen, Manager of Instructional Computing Group, Harvard University

Harvard developed their own instructional management system called Web Site
Creator because they found that templates were too restrictive for their
needs.  In particular, templates make it difficult to capture many pedagogic
goals and to use the Web in innovative ways.  In addition, the staff believes
that it is important to "teach the faculty to fish," and they feel that
teaching them reusable skills is the best way to accomplish that goal.

Web Site Creator is based on the KISS (keep it simple, stupid) principle.
Each member of the Faculty of Arts and Sciences is provided with an online
"furnished room" based on a standard Unix account and they can do whatever
they like with it.  Web Site Creator offers 3.5 tiers of support:

  * Each course is given space (50 M bytes) in an instructional Web server.
  * Faculty have access to a set of easy-to-use interactive tools, including a calendar, online discussion lists (provided by Web Crossing), slide carousels, and so on.
  * Faculty have frequent access to comprehensive training and consultation.  For example, at the beginning of each term, the Instructional Computing Group offers one hour training/consultation blocks to faculty every day.
  * Formative evaluation, which allows the instructor to get feedback on the course during the semester.

Paul indicated that that course Web sites are primarily used for:

  * communication,
  * course administration, and
  * offering enhanced content

Last year, Harvard collected statistics on the use of course Web sites:  
  Class size | % with Web sites  
---|---  
less than 10 | 9.1  
10-29 | 18.8  
30-99 | 45.7  
100-249 | 69.5  
250+ | 84.6  
  
They observed that small classes tend not to use Web sites.  Paul's
explanation was that communication and course administration are not very
useful in small classes so the sites are only useful if the instructor has
some enhanced content to offer.  However, it is very time consuming to develop
enhanced.  Paul also noted that the larger classes are more likely to have Web
sites because these classes typically have teaching assistant support, and the
instructor can delegate them the responsibility for creating and maintaining
the Web site.

Harvard also collected statistics on when new material was added to course Web
sites.  Like Yale Medical School, they observed a significant drop off in the
addition of new material to the course Web sites towards the end of the term.

Web Site Creator is written in Perl and javascript, but they are not likely to
make it publicly available because it is very integrated into their server
structure.

Take a look at the [Harvard Instructional Computing Group
site](http://icg.harvard.edu) to learn more about Web Site Creator.  


* * *

####  Assessment  
Phillip D. Long, Executive Director, TLT Center and the Institute for
Technology Development, Seton Hall University  
[Stephen Landry](landryst@shu.edu), Chief information Officer, Seton Hall
University

Last year, Seton Hall conducted an evaluation to assess the impact of mobile
computing on freshmen entering in Fall 1998 to look at their satisfaction with
the learning environment and the student learning outcomes.  In their
examination of students' baseline proficiency with computers, they found that
a majority of the incoming students could complete the follow tasks with ease:

  * searching the Web
  * sending and retrieving e-mail
  * creating, editing and modifying text

When they surveyed faculty to see how they were using instructional technology
in their courses, they found that the primary use was for communication.

Long and Landry noted that Web-based courses offer a unique opportunity to
capture the ephemera of teaching, namely faculty materials, students'
reactions via chat rooms ands e-mail, and student work.  They noted that each
class can be an experiment in which faculty can put forth a hypothesis,
collect data, and reason about it.  However, they noted that good teaching is
elusive, so how will we be able to tell whether technology helps.  They
proposed using Chickering and Gamson's Seven principles for good practice in
undergraduate education as guides:

  1. contact between student and the professor
  2. cooperation among students
  3. active learning
  4. prompt feedback
  5. time on task
  6. high expectations
  7. respect diversity of talents and learning styles

Seton Hall has established an [Institute for Technology
Development](http://www.cat.shu.edu/itd). (ITD) [I wasn't able to access the
ITD site on 9/1/99, but I did find a similar site for the [Institute for
Technology Assessment](http://www.cat.shu.edu/Assessment/) .]  ITD offers a
variety of services including:

  * technology assessment at the institutional level, including a complete set of assessment instruments, statistical analysis, profile research, national benchmarking, an assessment resource handbook, on-site or virtual consultation, and a visiting scholar lecture series on classroom assessment, institutional benefits, and a panel on practices.
  * Lotus LearningSpace faculty training and support
  * student technology assistants
  * discipline-based faculty consulting
  * ubiquitous computing consulting

As part of their technology assessment activities, Seton Hall is developing a
national repository of information on assessing the impact of technology on
teaching and learning at the institutional level.  They would like other
schools to use their assessment tools and share their data with them.

  
  
### Additional information  
  
#### **Tri-College Questions**

####  **How are faculty using these products in the classroom?**

  
For the most part, the speakers indicated that the majority of faculty are not
using these systems.   Those who are typically are using them for
communication.

* * *

**What features do faculty find are important?   What do they find limiting?**

For the faculty at **UMass** , the important features of an instructional
management system include:

  * asynchronous communication (bulletin boards - especially threaded discussions, e-mail)
  * synchronous communication (chat, whiteboards)
  * on-line quizzes
  * an easy way to manage and put course content online
  * access control (password protection)
  * student progress tracking
  * an online grade book
  * using HTML to create course content
  * a course calendar

They noted that although the current version of WebCT supports drop boxes and
shared files, these features are difficult to use.  However, they said these
problems will be fixed in the next release.  


**Seton Hall** observed that Lotus LearningSpace is an effective pedagogical
tool for distributed learning, dialogic learning, and reflective and critical
thinking.   They found that it was not useful for authentic and complex
learning, and public accountability, and it dictates a linear pedagogical
style.

Given Seton Hall's mobile computing environment (a laptop for every student
and faculty member), the ability to replicate course materials is an essential
feature.   Replication allows faculty and students load a course onto their
laptops, work on it without being connected to the Internet, and later
synchronize their personal copy with the version on the server.  Currently,
Lotus LearningSpace is the only instructional management systems that supports
replication.  Another useful feature is the ability to restart a course  by
having the system go through and remove student conversations and annotations.

Lotus LearningSpace's most significant limitation is that it's primary target
is the corporate workplace so there are times when there is a mismatch with
the university's needs.  Most of he problems seem to be caused by Lotus Notes,
which is the backend database for Lotus LearningSpace.  Lotus Notes is non-
trivial to administer, and it requires at least one full-time support person.
In addition, Lotus Notes is an enterprise-wide solution so the entire
organization must adopt it for institutional workflow, e-mail, and bulletin
boards.  


A **member of the audience** pointed out that the password protection feature
of most of these systems makes it difficult, if not impossible, for students
to look at a course's online materials while they are trying to decide which
classes to take.   The speakers noted that Lotus LearningSpace provides a
public front end that allows access non-class members to access the course
description and WebCT allows external pages to link to the course syllabus.

* * *

**Copyright issues, especially for graphics.   Any policies to protect faculty
and the colleges?  What constitutes fair use?**

None of the schools that gave presentations have a policy addressing copyright
issues.  All of them stated that "they are not the police" and it is not their
job to actively look for copyright violations.  All of the sites use password
protection to ensure that only registered students can view the online
material, and they view what goes on in these spaces as a private exchange
among the instructor and the students.  The only time they investigate a
possible copyright violation is if someone registers a complaint.  


**UMass** will be posting information on copyright on their site in the near
future, but they do not have a copyright policy.  


**Harvard** 's policy is to publish material online, ask permission, and take
down the material if a problem arises.  


Until last week **Wesleyan University** required the faculty or their
departments to obtaining copyright permission for materials on reserve in the
library.   Now, the library is responsible for obtaining copyright permission
for all of the materials in the electronic reserves, regardless of whether the
library already owns the materials.  This service will be extended to include
paper reserves starting in Spring 2000.  They have spoken with a number of
their colleagues at other schools that offer electronic reserves and have
heard that most of the requests for copyright permission have been denied.
Most of these requests have been to clearinghouses, so Wesleyan plans to go
directly to the publishers.

* * *

**Can instructional management systems handle font encodings other than latin
scripts (Double Byte languages like Korean and Chinese and Japanese), font
encodings like KOI8 for Russian, Right to left languages like Hebrew?**

**WebCT** currently supports English, Dutch, Finnish, French, and Spanish for
course use, and English, Dutch, French, and Spanish for developer's use.
Support for the following languages is planned for the future: Chinese,
German, Greek, Hungarian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Portuguese (Portugal and
Brazil), Russian, and Swedish.  


**Lotus LearningSpace** does not provide support for other languages, but you
can buy add-on software from a third party vendor.  


The speaker from Yale Medical School had only developed pages in English and
was not aware of **CourseInfo** 's support for other languages.

* * *

**Where does the course material reside?   Do we host the site (and therefore
have some control and the ability to modify the program) or do they host the
site and we send all material to them?**

In all of the systems that were discussed, the course material resides on the
college's servers.

* * *

**What was the selection processes and criteria used in looking at the
products?**

Doris Peterson from **UMass** recommends a very good Web site by Dr. Bruce
Landon (Douglas College, New Westminster, B.C.) for people interested in a
[comparative analysis of course management
tools](http://www.ctt.bc.ca/landonline/).  


As mentioned above, about 1.5 years ago **Yale's Faculty of Arts and
Sciences** was trying to decide whether to purchase a commercial instructional
management systems or build their own.   The factors that they considered
were:

  * longevity - will the company still be around in several years?
  * customization - how well does the system accommodate unanticipated needs?
  * cost - purchase price, development, and support
  * scalability
  * security - Yale is very security conscious.  They want each person to have a single login and password that is Kerberos compliant.
  * ease of use

Security and ease of use where the two main factors in their decision to
develop their own system.  


**Yale Medical School** wanted a system with a strong assessment component
because they do not have any formal exams and the students wanted some way to
self-assess their progress and performance.  They went with CourseInfo because
they felt it had the best assessment features.  


As noted above, replication is an essential feature at **Seton Hall** where
all students and faculty have their own laptop computers.   Currently, Lotus
LearningSpace is the only instructional management system that supports this
feature.

* * *

**What were people hoping to get out of CourseInfo and what did they get?**

As mentioned above, **Yale Medical School** selected CourseInfo because of its
assessment features, and they are very happy with this choice.

* * *

**Have any tried hooking in the systems with their administrative database
systems?   Have any tied their IMS into their main campus authentication
systems. (That is, are they managing a whole new account base, or using
existing accounts and passwords.)**

None of the schools directly hooked up to their administrative databases or
their campus authentication systems to their course management systems.
**Yale Medical School** manually uploads the account names and passwords from
their central system so students conceptually have a single account name and
password.

* * *

**How have the faculty taken to the systems?**

On the whole, faculty at all schools have been slow to embrace instructional
management systems.  Almost all of the speakers indicated that their faculty
were reluctant (or slow) to change their teaching style.  Some of the reasons
cited include: the emphasis on research over teaching, the amount of time
required to create online materials, the lack of adequate support to help
faculty with online course development, and, in some cases (e.g., UMass), the
fact that not all students have access to computers and the Internet.  Time
pressures remain an important factor even when faculty have made an effort to
put course materials online.  For example, Yale Medical School and Harvard
observed that the majority of the faculty stop adding new material starting
around the middle of the semester.

Most schools have found that larger courses tend to be the first to use these
systems because the instructor can delegate the responsibility for creating
and maintaining the class Web site to one of the teaching assistants assigned
to the course.  A similar pattern arises when looking at attendance at
tutorials on instructional management systems.  Again, faculty attendance is
typically low and many instructors have their teaching assistants attend for
them.

In most cases the faculty who have integrated instructional course management
systems into their courses have had positive student experiences.  Each
speaker had at least one success story as discussed above.

* * *

**How have students taken to the systems?**

As discussed earlier, instructional management systems were introduced at
**Yale Medical School** in response to student demand to have online access to
course materials.   Overall, the students are happy with the system.  However,
their two biggest complaints are that they would like to see more course offer
materials online (currently only about 22% of the courses use CourseInfo) and
they would like the courses that do provide online materials to do so
consistently throughout the semester (due to time pressures, most faculty stop
posting new material around the middle of the semester).

####

* * *

####  Greetings from former members of the Tri-college community

Two former members of the Tri-college community were at the workshop.  They
came up and introduced themselves during the first break, and they asked me to
pass along their greetings to their former colleagues.  They are:

  * [Philip Fitz](mailto:pefitz@amherst.edu), Director of Information Technology, Amherst College
  * [Thomas Warger](mailto:twarger@fivecolleges.edu), Assistant Coordinator for Information Services, Five Colleges, Inc.

  
  
  
Information supplied by: [Cecelia Buchanan](mailto:cbuchana@haverford.edu)  
Maintained by: [Cecelia Buchanan](mailto:cbuchana@haverford.edu)  

