# **Management Information Systems**

* * *

#### [Analysis of IT Industries](http://techedcon.com/mason720/)

> North American and global economic, political and legal factors affecting
the organization, growth and performance of IT industries, including trade in
services, privatization, strategic alliances, technology transfer, standards,
and government regulations. Syllabus. Calendar. Lecture notes. Assignments.
Student work. Links to related materials. By Andres Fortino, George Mason
University.

#### [Application Program Development
I](http://www.stcloud.msus.edu/~rheath/bc250/syllabus.htm)

> Requirement analysis,input/process/output, algorithm development using
pseudocode, use of CASE tools, and program testing. Structured and object-
oriented design. Syllabus, calendar, assignments, exams, and links to related
materials. By Richard D. Heath, Saint Cloud State University.

#### [Business Data
Communications](http://www.smeal.psu.edu/misweb/datacomm.html)

> Technical concepts, strategic use of telecommunication in business, and
managerial issues surrounding development and operation. Syllabus, calendar,
lecture notes, assignments, grades, student work, and links to related
materials. By Anthony A. Verstraete, Penn State University.

#### [Business Data
Processing](http://www.bus.orst.edu/faculty/Tyran/webs/BA370/Fall98/homepage.htm)

> Business applications and implementation of information technology.
Syllabus. Calendar. Assignments. Grades. Links to related materials. By Craig
K. Tyran, Oregon State University.

#### [Business Information
Systems](http://www.smeal.psu.edu/misweb/pcourses.html)

> Course. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, exams, grades, and
links to related materials. By Anthony A. Verstraete, Penn State University.

#### [Business Use of the Internet](http://www.thomas.edu/chris/cs562/)

> Graduate-level. Syllabus, calendar, and links to related materials. By
Christopher Rhoda, Thomas College.

#### [Computer Literacy and Windows
95](http://frontpage.hypermall.com/jforrest/cms/CMS1110/cms1110.htm)

> Self-paced. Basic nomenclature of the computer, using Windows 95 as the
operating system. Syllabus, calendar, assignments, and grades. By Jeff
Forrest, Metropolitan State College of Denver.

#### [Computer Systems and (Without)
Programming](http://www.econ.vu.nl/vakgroep/bik/csp97.html)

> Information systems development and changes that result from new technology
and changing business needs. Syllabus, assignments, student work, and links to
related materials. By Tsvi Vinig and Hein Mevissen, Vrije Universiteit, The
Netherlands.

#### [Decision Support Systems](http://www.uky.edu/BusinessEconomics/dssakba/)

> Knowledge-management approach. Syllabus, lecture notes, discussion forums,
Powerpoint slides, and links to related materials. By C. W. Holsapple,
University of Kentucky.

#### [Discrete Event Systems
Simulation](http://ubmail.ubalt.edu/~harsham/simulation/sim.htm)

> Course. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, grades, and links to
related materials. By Hossein Arsham, University of Baltimore.

#### [Emerging Technologies](http://www.thomas.edu/chris/cs444/)

> Course. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, and links to related
materials. By Christopher Rhoda, Thomas College.

#### [Global Issues in Information
Technology](http://www.weber.edu/ist/dsamson/ist478/)

> Telecommunications, Internet, computer-based workgroups, and network-based
production and logistics management systems in multinational and transnational
organizations. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, student work,
and links to related materials. By Dolly Samson, Weber State University.

#### [Impact of New Information Resources: Multimedia and
Networks](http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/impact/)

> Social impact of technology. Syllabus, assignments, student work, and links
to related materials. By Howard Bresser, University of California, Berkeley.

#### [Information Systems for
Managers](http://web.singnet.com.sg/~tyeap/usq/ism/)

> Future directions and challenges. Syllabus. Calendar. Lecture notes.
Assignments. Exams. Student work. Links to related materials. By Tralvex Yeap,
University of Southern Queensland.

#### [The Information Society](http://www.lamp.ac.uk/~ewan/InfSoc/)

> Course. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, exams, and links to
related materials. By Ewan Sutherland, University of Wales, Lampeter, UK.

#### [Information Technology](http://www.ntu.ac.sg/nbs/sis/courses/ab113/)

> Management of information technology for individual productivity and
organizational competitive advantage. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, and
assignments. By Lai Lai Tung, Amit Das, and Gabriel Goren, Nanyang Business
School, Singapore.

#### [Information Technology and
Telecommunications](http://www.usfca.edu/alev/courses.htm)

> Graduate-level. Syllabus. By Alev M. Efendioglu, University of San
Francisco.

#### [Information Technology for
Management](http://www.weber.edu/ist/dsamson/ist340/)

> Improvement of productivity and promotion of competitive positions in the
marketplace. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, student work, and
links to related materials. By Dolly Samson, Weber State University.

#### [International Issues in
Telecommunications](http://web.gmu.edu/ruth/csehgal/mis.html)

> Course. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, guest speakers, assignments,
exams, and links to related materials. By Stephen Ruth, George Mason
University.

#### [Internet for Business](http://ellen.dnmyers.edu/current/mg282syl.htm)

> The Internet as a business phenomena and tool. Students create a Web site
for a proposed business. Syllabus, assignments, calendar, and links to related
materials. By Trivison and Brhel, David N. Myers College.

#### [Introduction to Information
Systems](http://www.yorku.ca/faculty/academic/middletn/mgts5110/index.htm)

> Graduate-level. Syllabus, lecture notes, student work, and links to related
materials. By Catherine Middleton, York University, Canada.

#### [Introduction to Management Information
Systems](http://www.utexas.edu/courses/dalbert/)

> Computer and information systems concepts, some of the most popular software
tools currently available. Syllabus. Calendar. Assignments. Links to related
materials. By David J. Albert, University of Texas - Austin.

#### [Knowledge Engineering](http://www.cbu.edu/~pong/engm624.htm)

> Expert systems, artificial neural networks, genetic algorithms,
hypertext/hypermedia, Internet/intranet. Syllabus, calendar, assignments,
student work, and links to related materials. By Siripong Malasri, Christian
Brothers University.

#### [Management Information Systems](http://www.gsia.cmu.edu/bb26/70-451/)

> Course. Lecture notes, assignments, exams, and supplemental readings. By
Brian Butler, Carnegie Mellon University.

#### [Management Information
Systems](http://www.econ.ucsb.edu/~owen/econ185/185home.htm)

> Database management, knowledge management, intellectual capitalism,
extracting business value, computer systems, operating systems, internet
systems, creating www pages, legal issues of the web, portals, ecommerce,
intranets, extranets, and Y2k. Syllabus. Lecture notes. Assignments. Exams.
Grades. Links to related materials. By Glenn Owen, University of California at
Santa Barbara, California.

#### [Management of Information
Technology](http://www.cox.smu.edu/mis/talks/emba/index.html)

> Course. Course syllabus, overview, and assignments. By Blake Ives, Southern
Methodist University.

#### [Managing Electronic Commerce](http://commerce.ssb.rochester.edu/)

> Online retailing, banking, and publishing. Syllabus, calendar, lecture
notes, assignments, exams, and links to related materials. By Ravi Kalakota,
University of Rochester.

#### [Managing Information Systems](http://www.netset.com/~kcohen/cs205/)

> Course. Syllabus. By Ken Cohen, Park College - Columbus Resident Center.

#### [Programming Language: Visual C++](http://www.thomas.edu/chris/cs320/)

> Course. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, and links to related
materials. By Christopher Rhoda, Thomas College.

#### [Riding the Information
Superhighway](http://www.csusm.edu/public/jankowski/superhighway/syllabus.html)

> Internet tools (graphical browser and UNIX shell). Business implications.
Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, and assignments. By David Jankowski,
California State University, San Marcos.

#### [Small Systems Technology \- NT 4.0 Workstation
Certification](http://asgard.kent.edu/smallsys/)

> Principles of operation of PCs, basics of PC support and maintenance, and
aggressive preparation for Microsoft certification exam 70-073, Windows NT 4.0
Workstation. Can be taken for no credit by a diligent WWW distance learner.
Syllabus. Calendar. Lecture notes. Assignments. Exams. Grades. Links to
related materials. By Geoff Howard, Kent State University.

#### [Spreadsheet Applications](http://video.saintleo.edu/com230/)

> Building templates, combining spreadsheets, designing macros, using
financial and statistical functions, preparing graphs, and manipulating data
by using sorts and queries. Syllabus. Calendar. Assignments. Grades. Links to
related materials. By Terry Redman, Saint Leo College.

#### [Spreadsheets with Excel
97](http://frontpage.hypermall.com/jforrest/cms/CMS190A/cms190a.htm)

> Self-paced. Creating and editing workbooks, command structures, graphics,
and formulas. Syllabus, calendar, assignments, and grades. By Jeff Forrest,
Metropolitan State College of Denver.

#### [Strategic Information Systems
Management](http://www.cs.tcd.ie/www/dalgeo/sism/sism.html)

> An executive perspective on strategic management in an organisation.
Syllabus, calendar, and assignments. By David Algeo, University of Dublin,
Trinity College, Ireland.

#### [Strategic Management for High Technology
Industries](http://wwwvms.utexas.edu/~bgib366/MIS381.HTML)

> Graduate-level. Industry, firm, and product analysis at a strategic level in
the context of high technology industries. Hypercompetitive situations.
Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, student work, and links to
related materials. By Timothy W. Ruefli and Aldor Lanctot, University of Texas
at Austin.

#### [Systems Analysis I](http://asgard.kent.edu/systems1/)

> System development case assignments involving a fictitious company.
Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, grades, and links to related
materials. By Geoff Howard, Kent State University.

#### [Systems Analysis and
Design](http://www.bus.orst.edu/misfaculty/tyran/BA371/Spring98/homepage.htm)

> Information systems that meet the demands of end users. Methods, tools, and
techniques. Alternative approaches to IS development; methods to gather user
requirements; process and data-oriented modeling tools used to understand,
communicate, and document organizational requirements; database design; user
interface design; distributed systems; software inspection techniques.
Syllabus. Calendar. Assignments. Grades. Links to related materials. By Craig
K. Tyran, Oregon State University.

#### [Systems Analysis and
Design](http://www.csusm.edu/public/jankowski/sand/syllabus.html)

> Management's role in the development process. Initial stages of the systems
development life cycle. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, and
exams. By David Jankowski, California State University, San Marcos.

#### [Systems Design and
Implementation](http://www.colorado.edu/infs/jcb/class/syll4130.html)

> Responsive and long-lasting software. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes,
assignments, exams, and student work. By James C. Brancheau, University of
Colorado at Boulder.

#### [Systems Development Methodologies](http://asgard.kent.edu/gradmeth)

> Lecture materials and student presentations on RAD, Neural Net, Object-
Oriented, WWW Application, and Project Management methodologies in PowerPoint.
Syllabus. Calendar. Lecture notes. Assignments. Exams. Grades. Student work.
Links to related materials. By Geoff Howard, Kent State University.

#### [Various Case Studies](http://www.cox.smu.edu/mis/cases/home.html)

> Case studies on innovation and project management, commerce on the Web, and
other topics. Syllabus. By various professors, Southern Methodist University.

* * *

  **[Go Back To Homepage](http://www.cs.wvu.edu/~khan/)**

