[an error occurred while processing this directive]

* * *

## Love In World History

* * *

Item Number 000257 - Original Query  
Date: Sat, 22 Oct 1994

Next semester I am teaching a survey course in World History (1500-present)
for the first time.Conceptualizing the course and narrowing its focus have, of
course,confounded a novice such as I but I have decided to approach it through
the lens of love in the world since 1500. I would, therefore, greatly
appreciate suggestions for short, readily available and easily readable works
--biography, memoirs, or novels--dealing with male/female relations in five
world areas--North America, Latin America, Europe, Africa, and Asia. Ideally,
I would like a single work for each of the five centuries covered, one from
each area for a total of five. Class analysis of these readings will center
around what each relationship tells us about gender, race, and class in that
particular culture. For example, I have thought of using John Smith and
Pocahontas or Cortez and Dona Marina for the Americas, as relationships which
explore the encounter of europeans and natives as well as the phenomenon of
women as cultural mediators. I can't find anything on either of these couples
however. Since world history is not my particular speciality, I defer to the
experts. HELP!

Susan Eacker, Visiting Asst. Professor, Miami University,
[saeacker@miamiu.acs.muohio.edu](mailto:saeacker@miamiu.acs.muohio.edu)

* * *

Item Number 000260 - Reply #1  
Date: Sun, 23 Oct 1994

To Susan Eaker of Miami U. Love in History! For Africa, let me suggest one for
a starter. It's by Okot p'Bitek and it's called _Song of Lawino_ and _Song of
Ocol_ -- published together between one set of covers by Heinemann Educational
Books, African Writers series. It's a translation from the author's indigenous
Acholi and, with the clever use of a row between a wife and her husband,
explores Westernization vs. traditional values, male vs. female, etc.

Another one might be Elechi Amadi's _The Concubine_, which explores several
themes, including relations between the sexes in a precolonial West African
setting.

This should make a good start. If you want others, you can reach me by e-mail
at,

Randall L. Pouwels  
[RANDYP@cc1.uca.edu](mailto:RANDYP@cc1.uca.edu)

* * *

Item Number 000261 - Reply #2  
Date: Sun, 23 Oct 1994

Susan Eacker,  
Brilliant way to organize a world history syllabus.

For Africa you will want to explore the literature of Nigerian novelist Buchi
Emecheta.

Additionally, you will definitely want to view a film produced by Cameroonian
Jean-Pierre Bekolo, 1992, entitled QUARTIER MOZART, distributed by California
Newsreel; In French, subtitled in English. The film explores the sexual
politics of love and life in a "middle-class" quartier of Yaounde, Cameroon.
Bekolo's first film (age 26), Quartier Mozart is a Spike-Lee-esque (I think
explicitly so) production, and fascinating, although perhaps a little too
confusing for beginning students.

Cheers and please remember to share your final syllabus with us when it is
together.

Pier M. Larson  
History Department  
Penn State University  
[PML9@psuvm.psu.edu](mailto:PML9@psuvm.psu.edu)

* * *

Item Number 000262 - Reply #3  
Date: Sun, 23 Oct 1994

Additionally Susan Eacker might be interested in a court case not so much
about love as about marriage, gender, ethnicity, "tribal" authority versus
individual autonomy, which was argued recently in Nairobi, Kenya. Well, it IS
about the politics of love. A prominent Kenyan lawyer, of the Luo ethnic
group, died on December 20, 1986. A fight ensued between his wife, of the
Kikuyu ethnic group, and the lawyer's clan over burial of the dead body, which
raged over several months in court, on television, and in public debate
between conflicting rights, duties, obligations of wives, husbands, clans,
ethnic groups.

I provide you two citations:

Book: David William Cohen & E.S. Atieno Odhiambo, BURYING SM: THE **POLITICS
OF KNOWLEDGE AND THE SOCIOLOGY OF POWER IN AFRICA** (Heinemann, 1992). This is
probably too difficult for beginning undergraduates, although short (100 p),
but cast a glance at it.

Article: Patricia Stamp, "Burying Otieno: The Politics of Gender and Ethnicity
in Kenya" SIGNS 16,4 (1991), 808-845.

Pier M. Larson  
History Department  
Penn State University  
[PML9@psuvm.psu.edu](mailto:PML9@psuvm.psu.edu)

* * *

Item Number 000263 - Reply #4  
Date: Sun, 23 Oct 1994

Susan Eacker wrote:

>Next semester I am teaching a survey course in World History >(1500-present)
for the first time.Conceptualizing the course and >narrowing its focus have,
of course,confounded a novice such as I but >I have decided to approach it
through the lens of love in the world >since 1500. I would, therefore, greatly
appreciate suggestions for >short, readily available and easily readable works
--biography, >memoirs, or novels--dealing with male/female relations in five
world >areas--North America, Latin America, Europe, Africa, and Asia.

I would caution against focussing exclusively on male/female relations. Same
sex "relations" are also relevant to the history of love.

Also, a relevant reference may be: Henry Abelove "Some Speculations on the
History of 'Sexual Intercourse' During the 'Long Eighteenth Century'
inEngland" in *Natioanlism and Sexualities*, ed. by Andrew Parker, et. al.

* * *

Item Number 000266 - Reply #5  
Date: Sun, 23 Oct 1994

If you decide on Cortez and Dona Marina, you will need to be very careful.
Much that people think they know about that relationship is the result of
post-independence Mexican myth-making that began in the 19th century. Whoever
wrote the entry for D.M. for the Encyclopedia Britannica fell for the whole
myth.

D.M. did NOT go to Spain, was not received in court, did not have a palace in
Chapultepec. She did not have multiple children by Cortez, did not kill her
child(ren) because he left her to go to Spain/take them to Spain. Etc.

When there was a discussion recently about using literature in teaching World
History, I was tempted to post something about a recent book (Malinche: Slave
Princess of Cortez. By a woman named Duran, published last year by Linnet
books.) It claimed to be anthropologically and historically informed. Thanked
Michael Coe, the Yale anthropologist, in the acknowledgements. Has a
"pronouncing glossary" in the back. Snowed the New York Public Library, from
which it received a designation as one of the year's recommended books for
adolescents.

It was only because the book is pitched to teens rather than the 18-22 year
old reader that I didn't mention this earlier.

The book is a crock, and I am sure Michael Coe would be embarrassed by it. It
is profoundly ignorant of the context of contact in 1519-1526. Except for the
trip-to-Spain, reception-in-court myth, it buys everything that has been
invented about D.M. in the last couple of centuries.

The pronouncing dictionary is also ignorant. The precontact world Duran
describes is full of things (bananas, mangos, malaria) that were introduced
post-contact. The education of young women and the motives and emotions of
D.M. are straight gothic romance.

Since Mexican independence from Spain, D.M. has been the handy scape goat for
centuries of colonial rule. After all, she is female, indigenous, and long-
dead. It was independence that created the context for the concept of
malinchismo, the betrayal of one's own in pursuit of the foreign. D.M. was
immediately trivialized through sexualization. For close to two centuries
Mexicans have been unable to mention her without calling her "the mistress of
Cortez." Frans Blom called her "a tender morsel." Octavio Paz called her "la
chingada," (the fucked one).

I did my best to separate the historical person from the myth in Between
Worlds (Rutgers, 1994), and I have taken a more interpretive tack in
"Rethinking Malinche" (to appear in a volume on Mexican Indian women, edited
by Susan Schroeder and forthcoming from U.of Oklahoma Press).

I don't think romantic love had much to do with D.M. and Cortez, or if it did,
we can't know anything of it at this remove and with this little
documentation. She left no texts herself. Cortez mentions her only twice in
his letters, only once by name. Bernal Diaz del Castillo claims she said she
was proud to have borne Cortez a son and was content in her marriage to his
lieutenant Jaramillo.

She had been ripped from context and changed hands at least twice befor she
was given to Cortez, so she had nobody to betray. She certainly had few
choices. And there is no evidence that she was subject to blind lust for white
men. In fact, she was in the hands of both Maya and then Spanish men for a
surprisingly long time before she was impregnated. One possibility is that she
was so valuable as an interpreter that Cortez protected her from sexual usage,
because pregnancy would have made her less available for work. He had, by the
way, children by several other Mexican Indian women.

I don't think there is a love story here.

Frances Karttunen  
[LIAR457@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu](mailto:LIAR457@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu)

* * *

Item Number 000268 - Reply #6  
Date: Sun, 23 Oct 1994

For a premodern love story you cannot overlook The Return of Martin Guerre.

Peter Holloran, Pine Manor College  
[pch@world.std.com](mailto:pch@world.std.com)

* * *

Item Number 000271 - Reply #7  
Date: Mon, 24 Oct 1994

There's a rich literature in China and Japan on this topic. For China I would
suggest the selection from *Red Chamber Dream* (also knowna s *STory of the
Stone*) in Cyril Birch, ed., *Anthology of Chinese Literature,* vol. 2, pp.
203-258. This is an 18th-century novel, the chapter deals with an upper-class
man taking a concubine and trying to keep it a secret from his wife. For
Japan, try Chikamatsu Monzaemon's play "Love Suicides at Sonesaki" or Ihara
Saikaku's "What the Seasons Brought to the Almanac Maker," both in Donald
Keene, ed., *Anthology of Japanese Literature." Both are late 17th-early 18th
century. Chikamatsu's play (less than 20 pp. in length) is a tragedy about a
love affair between a shop apprentice and a prostitute; Saikaku's stories are
usually more comic than tragic.

Robert Entenmann  
St. Olaf College  
[entenman@stolaf.edu](mailto:entenman@stolaf.edu)

* * *

**[Return](/~world/) to H-WORLD's Home Page. **

[an error occurred while processing this directive]

